













































Table of Contents 


 
ELBA  – Electronic Book for Adults                                                                            ELBA  – Electronic Book for Adults                                                          1                  

 
 

EEuurrooppeeaann  CCoolllleeccttiioonn  ooff  
SSoocciiaall  PPooeettrryy  aanndd  AArrtt  
((11880000  ––  11995500’’ss))  

EELLBBAA    
22000077  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    2                                    

 

  

  
 
TTiittllee  

EEuurrooppeeaann  CCoolllleeccttiioonn  ooff  SSoocciiaall  PPooeettrryy  
aanndd  AArrtt  
((11880000  ––  11995500’’ss))  

 
 
PPuubblliisshheerr  

EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss  ––  EEuurrooppeeaann  NNeettwwoorrkk    
 
 
 
EElleeccttrroonniicc  PPuubblliisshheerr  

EELLBBAA  PPaarrttnneerrsshhiipp  
 
  
YYeeaarr  

22000088  

 
LLiicceennssee  

MMaaiinnttaaiinn  aauutthhoorr  nnaammee,,  nnoonn--ccoommmmeerrcciiaall  uussee,,  ffrreeee  ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn,,  ffrreeee  eelleeccttrroonniicc  
ccooppyy,,  nnoo  mmooddiiffiiccaattiioonn,,  nnoo  ootthheerr  uussee  wwiitthhoouutt  EELLBBAA  ccoonnsseenntt..  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    3                                    

 

  

Table of Contents 
 

The ELBA Project ...................................................................................................................... 4 

Prologue ..................................................................................................................................... 6 

Foreword .................................................................................................................................... 9 

Cypriot Literature..................................................................................................................... 10 

Greek Literature ..................................................................................................................... 111 

Italian Literature..................................................................................................................... 273 

Lithuanian Literature.............................................................................................................. 421 

Spanish Literature .................................................................................................................. 481 

Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................ 621 

Bibliography........................................................................................................................... 622 

Appendix ................................................................................................................................ 628 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    4                                    

 

  

[Index] 

 

The ELBA Project  [Greek]  [Italian]  [Lithuanian]  [Spanish]  
 
 

ELBA project (Electronic Book for Adults) is a three years of European experience 
that lead together several institutions coming from different European countries (Spain, 
Greece, Italy, Cyprus, Lithuania ). In this section of the e-Book some project partners wanted 
to express what working in ELBA has meant for them and they wanted to share this with the 
wider audience. 

 
One of the partners was taking part in ELBA as their first international learning 

partnership project. In their experience, this was a great opportunity for teachers and students 
to improve their English language, ICT and literature skills. It was also a great chance to meet 
people from different European countries, to know their culture and traditions, to learn more 
about adult education in Europe. 

 
Another partner underlines that the participation in the ELBA project has given the 

opportunity to explore a field that was not very practised until that moment (the literature and 
the digitisation techniques), this way enriching its range of training offer and allowing the 
personnel to acquire new competences and establish new relationships. This has given a great 
added value and improved the “excellence” activities; these achieved results will surely 
positively  affect  the future plans and projects.  

 
Furthermore, for a female non-profit association, partner in the project, this was a real, 

valuable and precious “learning experience”. Not only each member of the staff was involved 
and developed their skills in relation to European culture and ICT, but also the students who 
participated at the meetings and training courses, acquired a better knowledge of the English 
language and had the chance to share different cultures, values and internationally driven 
experiences. 

  
Another important thing is related to the partnership: the ELBA partnership had the 

chance to grow years after years developing sounding team collaborative skills, tolerance and 
respect of individual and cultural differences. The final reflection addressing cultural issues 
comes from the fourth institution: its team had the opportunity of participating in an 
international project cooperation and working for a common goal. Working in groups needs a 
lot of organization and especially when these groups are not sharing the same culture and 
language. What ELBA project achieved was the focus on common characteristics that all 
human have and forget our cultural and national differences. It started an intercultural 
dialogue and we all learned a lot from each other having in mind that we were from North, 
South and East of Europe.  

 
The words of the “Union of Informatics Scientists of Viotia” are meaningful and 

worth to be quoted here: “The project itself is reaching its objectives and we are all happy and 
proud because we contributed to this outcome. More important than the project’s outcome had 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    5                                    

 

  

been the overall procedures that took place during the tree years of cooperation. Our meetings 
as well as the cultural events that co-existed alongside with the meeting works offered to the 
ELBA partners’ team the opportunity of becoming more united and concrete towards our 
objectives. The feelings that we all in our team shared extend not only to the satisfaction of 
completing successfully a project but especially to the joy of making friends inside the ELBA 
partnership. Friends and partners, for whom we share the same feelings of having promoted a 
co-operation to an intercultural friendship.” 

 [Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    6                                    

 

  

[Index] 

Prologue  [Greek]  [Italian]  [Lithuanian]  [Spanish]  

 
We are plunged into a world of deep changes, which affect the way to communicate 

and the means to produce are taking place. Ways and means closely tightened to underpin the 
so called Knowledge Society. 
 

Across human history the accumulation and transmission of this knowledge has been 
carried out through books and libraries and the education systems. At present key elements as 
libraries and schools are undergoing a deep transformation which reflects, on the one hand, 
the new ways of editing and the structure and organization of the new sort of library, and, on 
the other hand , the need which methods of education and pedagogy will evolve towards a 
lifelong training. In addition, the queries of work which will be requested in the rising 
Knowledge Society involve an increasing amount of information and highly dynamic 
knowledge which move quickly with the times. 
 

Within this general framework we wanted to contribute with the present project find 
new ways to work and to organize the work - coordinated and distributed - and to study 
experimental new methodologies applied to the edition through technical skills of the new 
task requirements. 
 

By organizing our work we also became aware that we are collaborating  to cultural 
integration with the countries which participated in the project, and also with Europe, through 
a product whose content historically gathers Poetry as one of its most sensitive  expressions of 
culture.  
 

Thus we drew up a European Collection of Poetry and Art since 19th century until the 
middle of 20th century of the countries which had participated in the development of the 
project. We started our work drawing up the contents and structure of the electronic book.  
 

Obviously this took us to a previous study of Literature, Culture and History which 
encompassed the period already determined. We agreed that the Collection would contain 
poems of  fifty selected poets of each participating country. 
 

We studied the cultural and historical repertoires, contexts, the similarities between 
countries and we had the chance to reflect that there should be a turnaround in the cultural use 
of integration of Europe. A mutual knowledge to underpin the European common which 
would allow a rapprochement between cultures.  
 

The result of this work was a collection of more than 250 poems belonging to writers 
of five countries and written in four different languages. In order to obtain an homogeneous 
product we took English language as the communication language and kept our own 
languages to express diversity within the unity. It was necessary hence to find out the 
translations of the poems, translate them if there were no translations found or provide a short 
description of them. The final outcome was a multilingual product. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    7                                    

 

  

 
The accomplishment of this previous intellectual work seems to us very advisable 

before starting any work or technical process, since to study and know the purpose of the 
tasks we are carrying out always stimulate and enrich the formative process.  
 

Whether if they are focused on the emergent Knowledge Society the main thing will 
be the content and the techniques we use.  In this respect it should facilitate the cultural 
creation, its dissemination and the application to the processes of producing material goods 
through automatic devices. 
 

Hitherto we have focused our work on the definition of the realization of the electronic 
book, in other words the material product we had in mind. Firstly, the electronic book took us 
to the study of the nature and structure of this sort of books. Secondly, to learn prior the 
techniques of digitalisation which are necessary to pass from the content of texts printed on 
paper to the new electronic supports. And to experience which were the most adequate means 
to be used in our own case. 
 

These tasks were distributed among the cluster of participants by elaborating 
computing tools of communication among the different associated groups of the project. The 
learners of the associated institutions got involved by learning the techniques of digitalisation 
and the nature and structure of digital books. Thus, we have suggested a subject to lifelong 
professional learning based on a new technology of digital editing which has a strong 
multiplier effect.  
 

Actually in the forthcoming future most of the information will circulate on a digital 
basis. We think that the qualification on these techniques hence will be the cornerstone of the 
diffusion and learning of other techniques which will be expounded and explained in "digital 
texts", with the facility of including images, audio, and links to videos and other interactive 
tools which will facilitate training. 
 

Moreover, due to the truly essence of the electronic techniques, comparatively 
different from the mechanical ones used by Guttenberg, they make the platforms of hardware 
necessary to the digital edition of simpler use, installation and maintenance and far more 
economic  than the previous methods used in the printed edition. It becomes easier to install 
small factories, even at home, for the accomplishment of digital edition products of high 
quality. 
 

On the other hand, the promotion of the digital edition not only of new texts, but of 
texts laying in our libraries, and their organization in digital libraries will eventually make 
easier to read books and make the access to culture within everyone’s reach. 
 

We finished our work with the edition of an electronic book on a hard support, entitled 
"European Collection of Social Poetry and Art  (1800- 1950). The tasks undertaken in the last 
stage consisted basically on the design of the structure and the physical accomplishment of 
the electronic book. 
 

The structure was determined by splitting the material in five chapters - one for each 
collaborating country. Each section was made up of an Introduction which shows the 
historical context of the poetry of each country, an index of the countries’ poets and artists, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    8                                    

 

  

their biographies followed by the poems irrespectively expounded in a double column - one 
with the poem in English or, if missing with a short description/comment to the poem,  and 
the other in its original language. Besides it contains other sections dedicated to Prologue, 
Foreword, Acknowledgments and Bibliography. 
 

The navigation throughout the book is made through series of links (hyperlinks) which 
start off  an initial index lead us to each one of the chapters and from the indexes of the 
chapters to the section of each poet and suitable return links to make the navigation through 
the book easier. The consequences of including a digital book in the net, or building up a 
digital library have also been experienced. 
 

Besides the specific final product which was the main goal of ELBA project and the 
introduction of new techniques and practices we highlight another objective of our project 
which is the use of coordinated and distributed organization in the development of the 
projects and the experience on cooperative work using computing networks distributed in 
enlarged geographic scopes. This issue should be included as a learning topic within the 
curricula of professional training institutions to help setting up working groups located in 
different countries and geographical regions. 
 

The development of the electronic book apart from the technical aspects of our work, 
has helped us to know each other through the definition of the cultural profiles of our own 
countries allowing the transfer of knowledge and therefore an integration within the widened 
cultural diversity of the countries participating in the project. In addition, as the process of 
evolution of different European cultures keeps a different pace, new technologies act as tools 
which help bridging the gap between individual and social development for the foundation of 
a common European soul. 
 

In this respect and within the new framework of construction and of intercultural 
dialogue, ELBA project is a sample of co-joint participation in the creation of a cultural 
network set in the complete book which has promoted the introduction of the new 
technologies and has given way to a fruitful activity of cooperation boosting the initiative and 
responsibility of the participants.  
 
Pilar Cataño Canabal 
ELBA Project Coordinator  
 

[Index] 
  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    9                                    

 

  

[Index]  

Foreword   [Greek]  [Italian]  [Lithuanian]  [Spanish]  

For the casual reader, the following selections might seem at first glance random; 
however, while examining closely these poems, one can see under the prism of poetry a 
number of aesthetic and philosophical principles.  

One can also hope that this may bridge the gap between what is particular in the 
experience, and what is universal in the outlook of life as expressed by the European culture 
and worlds. 

I try to remember how the qualities of the mind, considered in the West as young 
people’s spiritual, have been overlooked in the European society. When not ignored, they 
were ridiculed in the name of profit and on the basis of a materialist ideology. 

However, freedom of individual expression constitutes just one of many different 
aspects of human creativity. Poetry—as we have observed—is a medium best suited for 
maintaining the balance between the two realities which Europe  constantly faces; one, being 
the inner reality of the mind, and the other, the reality of self-preservation in the world as it is. 

We admire the balance and intellectual restraint attributed to Classicism. It appears 
inspired by the classical model of excellence as applied to contemporary poetry, even though 
the rules that govern some of the work are as far as it can be from the notion of classicist 
imitation of anybody including the old masters.  

Content and form are inseparably interwoven. A poem can create a mood, picture, or 
feeling. Poetry usually forms words or messages. A poem can tell stories similar to a folk tail 
or legend. A poem written in any style often resembles the rhythms of speech. A poem written 
about one's life, personality traits, and ambitions. Poetry treats a serious subject sometimes 
with humor. Themes are usually connected to love and romance.  
 

Poetry which holds the principles and ideals of beauty which are characteristic of 
Greek and Roman art, architecture, and literature.  
  
A poem speaks to a listener. A poem written in honor of the people of all nations and cultures. 
A short lyrical poem can contain poetic thoughts. Thoughts and themes are usually connected 
to love and romance. The closing signature often includes the poet's meaning of life as 
perceived by the poet himself.   
 
Poetry, a peaceful and idealized scene, tells stories about heroes of a bygone age. Poetry 
depicts rural life in a peaceful, romanticized way.  

 

[Index]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    10                                

 

  

[Index] 
 

Cypriot Literature 
 

Overview 

 
The Cyprus selection of poetry covers a period from 1890 to 1974. In the early 1878 

Cyprus was under the British occupation and most of poets were into myth, Cypriot tradition, 
hopes and feelings. Their main language at the time was the Cypriot dialect. 

 
Beginning of the 20th century literature followed the Greek style of poetry. Greek 

language was at that time the main writing tool, even though they were some Turkish Cypriot 
that they wrote in Turkish their poem were not as popular within the island as the Greek 
Cypriot. 

 
According to the social changes, political situation and after the Second World War, 

poetry in Cyprus got a new syle of poetry enriched by new sentimental and spiritual character. 
After the national revolution against British in 1955, the freedom and justice were the 
influence of most Cypriots poets. This lasted almost 5 years.  

 

[Index] 

 

Περίληψη 
 
 
Η επιλογή ποιημάτων καλύπτει την περίοδο από το 1890 μέχρι το1950 με βασικό 

κριτήριο την ημερομηνία γέννησης του ποιητή(κάποια ποιήματα μπορεί να γράφτηκαν 
αργότερα).  

 
 Το 1878 η Κύπρος πέρασε στην αγγλική  κυριαρχία.Οι  συνθήκες διαβίωσης των 

Κυπρίων  μαζί με την αμορφωσιά  αποτέλεσαν τους παράγοντες που η ποίηση και γενικά η 
λογοτεχνία  δεν είχε την αναμενόμενη εξέλιξη. Οι περισσότεροι ποιητές της εποχής  
περιορίζονταν σε θέματα   που αφορούσαν στην  Κυπριακή ζωή  και στις παραδόσεις της. 
Σ΄αυτά εξέφραζαν τα συναισθήματά τους (αγάπη, πόνο για το θάνατο και τον  πόθο για 
ελευθερία). Κύρια γλώσσα γραφής η κυπριακή διάλεκτος.  

 
Από τις  αρχές του 20ου αιώνα, όταν πλέον η παιδεία και τα σχολεία αυξάνονται,  η 

επαφή με τον ελλαδικό χώρο και την ποίηση  αποτελεί ουσιαστικό παράγοντα διαμόρφωσης  
της νεότερης κυπριακής ποίησης. Έτσι η ελληνική γλώσσα και τα ρεύματα που κυριαρχούν 
στον ελλαδικό χώρο θα καθορίσουν τον τρόπο γραφής των περισσότερων ποιητών του 20ου 
αι.  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    11                                

 

  

 
Γύρω στα μέσα του 20ου αι. η ποίηση της Κύπρου αρχίζει να δέχεται επιδράσεις από 

τα ευρύτερα ευρωπαϊκά ρεύματα αφού αρκετοί Κύπριοι σπουδάζουν στις Ευρωπαϊκές 
πρωτεύουσες. 

 
Η τουρκοκυπριακή κοινότητα ανέδειξε ποιητές που έγραψαν ποιήματα στην 

Τουρκική γλώσσα.  
 

[Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    12                                

 
 

[Index]   

Cypriot Poets 
 
Vasilis Michaelides

Angelidou Klairi  

Anthias Tefkros

Andreas Pastelas 

Christofides Andreas

Alithersis Glafcos  

Charalambides Kyriakos

Michanikos Pantelis

Kranidiotis Nicos  

Ioannides Klitos

Ierodiakonou Andriana  

Joseph Josephides

Theoclis Kouyialis

Krallis Manos

Kiriacos Charalambides

Korfioti – Panayiοtidou Vera  

Lyssiotis Xanthos

Likavgis Anthos

Marangou Niki  

Mavris Christos

Moleskis Giorgos

Montis Costas  

Nicolaou Theodosis  

Orphanides Nikos  

Pashiardes Michalis  

Papaonisiforou Myrianthy  

Patapiou Nasa  

Peonidou Elli  

Philippou – Ladaki Niki  

Phylactou Takis  

Pierides Theodossis  

Pyliotis Achilleas  

Savvidou – Theodoulou Mona  

Stavrides Phivos  

Stavrou – Ioannidou Roulla  

Stylianou Theodoros  

Theocharidou Ianthe  

Valdaserides Pavlos  

Zafeiriou Lefkios  

Zymboulakis Stephanos  ) 

Kypros Chrysanthis  

Neshe Yasin

Pitsa Galazi

Nora Nadjarian

 

 

   [Index] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            13        

 
 

  

[Index]   

Michaelides Vasilis (1846 – 1917) 

 
Vasilis Michaelides was born in small village called Leukoniko in 1846 and he died in 

1917 in the town of Lemesos(Limassol), in an old aged house. He wrote poetry during 19th 
and the 20th century. Most of his poems are about love and freedom. He writes in the Cypriot 
dialect. Some popular poems are 9th of July, chiotissa, and anerada. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 
O Βασίλης Μιχαηλίδης γεννήθηκε στο Λευκόνοικο το 1846 και πέθανε το 1917 στη 

Λεμεσό, ξεχασμένος και παραμελημένος στο πτωχοκομείο.  Κορυφαίος ποιητής της Κύπρου 
του τέλους του 19ου  και των αρχών του 20ου.   Στην ποίησή του εκφράζει την αγωνία και 
τους εθνικούς καημούς της Κύπρου.  Έγραψε όμως και ποιήματα με ερωτικό και κοινωνικό 
περιεχόμενο.  Χρησιμοποιεί και καταξιώνει την Κυπριακή διάλεκτο.  Τα πιο γνωστά 
ποιήματά του, η 9η Ιουλίου, η Χιώτισσα, η Ανεράδα. 
 

[Index] [Cypriot Poets  ] 
 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            14        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

ANERADA 

 

 

Η ΑΝΕΡΑΔΑ 

 

 
Back in the place where I my life began, 

A budding youth 
Already throbbing with a young man´s pulse, 

My fear of goblins lately overcome, 
No longer shy, 

I venture out, my curiosity to satisfy 
 

Near by a river ford 
My eyes a vision, a dazzling slender form did glimpse. 

Cursed may the moment be! 
Unfortunate me, I was entrapped, 

Caught in the noose, held tight and fast, 
Ensnared a pasture like a lamb 

She looked at me and the place lit up 
My mind was dazzled 

The world appeared brighter by far 
She smiled at me 

And heaven was conjured up 
I was dumbfounded, stunned. 

 
At once I lost myself 

And gaping, spellbound I stood, 
Obvious to the world 

“Come, follow me,” she said 
And I poor fool, smitten in my heart 

Followed in her path 
 

Mountains we crossed and blossom – covered hill 
And plains with thistle clad 

Together we walked 
An endless walk 

Untiring travelers pressing on, 

 
Στην χώραν π' αναγιώθηκα και 'κόμα αναγιώννουμουν 

κι άρκεψα νάκκον να λαχτώ, τότες εξηφοήθηκα τα 
ζώδκια κι εν έχώννουμουν κι εξέβηκα να δκιανευτώ. 

 
Σε μιαν ποταμοδκιάβασην μιαν λυερήν εχχιάστηκα. -
νείεν καεί η σταλαμή!-ούλα τ' αρνίν έις τον τσοκκόν ο 
άχαρος επκιάστηκα, αντάν πκιαστεί μες στην νομήν; 
Αντάν με είδεν, έφεξεν κι ο νους μου εφενκιάστηκεν κι 
εφάνην κόσμος φωτερός.' Αντάν μου 'χαμογέλασεν, 
παράδεισος επλόστηκεν ομπρός μου κι έμεινα ξερός. 

 
Ευτυς το πας μου έχασα, ■ τον κόσμον ελλησμόνησα κι 
έμεινα χόσκοντα βριχτός. Είπεν μου: « Έλα κλούβα 
μου», και 'πού καρκιάς επόνησα κι εκλουθησά της, ο 

χαντός. 
Ααόνια, κάμπους και βουνά αντάμα εδκιαβήκαμεν 

γεμάτ' αθθους κι αγκαθθερά η στράτα δεν ετέλειωννεν 
και δεν εποσταθήκαμεν ήτουν για λλόου μας χαρά. 

'Ετρεμεν μεν και χάσει με κι έτρεμα μεν και χάσω την 
και μεν της πω και μεν μου πεί' εδίψουν την, 

εκαύκουμουν κι έτρεμα μεν και πκιάσω την και γινουμεν 
κι οι δκυο ' στραπή. 

' Υστερα σγοιαν παράδεισον έναν βουνόν εφτάσαμεν... 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            15        

 
 

  

The road a sheer delight to us 
 

Scared she was lest she should lose me 
Scared I was lest I should lose her 

No word to her I spoke nor she to me 
Thirsty I was for her, inflamed by desire 
Yet scared I was lest I should touch her, 

Afraid we might both be consumed by fire…….. 

 
 

Translated by:  Irena Ioannides
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            16        

 
 

  

 

Angelidou Klairi (1932) 
 

Klairi Angelidou was born in Famagusta. She studied Philosophy in Athens and 
served as teacher and Headmistress in Secondary Education. She was elected to Parliament 
and served as Minister of Education and Culture. She has published numerous collections of 
poetry, as well as prose and studies. Among other distinctions she has been honored by the 
Universities of Athens and of Thrace, Greece. 

 
[Index] [Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 
Γεννήθηκε στην Αμμόχωστο. Σπούδασε Ελληνική Φιλολογία στην Αθήνα και 

εργάστηκε ως Καθηγήτρια και Διευθύντρια Σχολείων στη Μέση Εκπαίδευση. Εξελέγη 
βουλευτής και υπηρέτησε ως Υπουργός Παδείας και Πολιτισμού. Εξέδωσε ποιητικές 
συλλογές, πεζά και μελέτες. Μεταξύ άλλων διακρίσεων τιμήθηκε απο το Πανεπιστήμιο 
Αθηνών και Θράκης. 

 
[Index] [Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            17        

 
 

  

      [Index] 

 
 

Cyprus Goddess 

 

 

Κύπριδα Θεά 

 
 

Sea-kissed Aphrodite, of Paphos 
You emerge from the foam 

Sun-drenched, beautiful dressed. 
Goddess of Beauty  

on the seashores of Cyprus. 
 

The Hours will dress you in a rose-hued veil 
And will crown you with ivy 

singing of the coming of Adonis. 
And he comes with the moonlight so manly, 

 
To warm love’s bed 

Sounding the depths of love, 
Bending his bow towards Aquarius, 

Who scatters red roses, 
Cyprus Goddess  

Translated by:  Constantinos Evangelides 

 
Θαλασσοφίλητη Αφροδίτη, 

Παφία, 
αναδύεσαι από τους αφρούς  
ηλιοπερίχυτη, ωριοπλέξουδη. 

Θεά του Κάλλους 
Στ’ ακροθαλάσσι της Κύπρου 

Οι Ώρες θα σε ντύσουν τα ροδόχροα 
πέπλα 

και με κισσό θα στεφανώσουν το κεφάλι σου 
τραγουδώντας τον ερχομό του Άδωνη 

Κι αυτός έρχεται με το φως του φεγγαριού 
Αρρενωπός, 

να ζεστάνει την κλίνη της αγάπης  
βυθομετρώντας το μέγεθος του έρωτα 

Τοξεύοντας κατα τον Υδροχόο, 
που σκορπά κόκκινα τριανταφυλλα 

Κύπριδα Θεά. 
 
 

 
 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            18        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

AUTUMN IN LICHTENSTEIN 

 

 

ΦΘΙΝΟΠΩΡΟ ΣΤΟ ΛΙΧΤΕΝΣΤΑΙΝ 

 
I have encountered Autumn in Lichtenstein. Its carpets 

yellow, red, gold 
in the bushes, on the grass and along the pavements 

raining lightly as it was 
a tiny porcupine 

took cover in its prickly shell. 
And I was awed by the wisdom of God. Schoolchildren 

with sparkling eyes and small smiles 
at the corners of their lips hurried past me in their colorful 

hoods. Beauty overflows in Lichtenstein 
in the blossoming flowerbeds at every corner, 

on the high mountains with the snowy peaks and in the 
eternal brooks of the Rhine which courses divine 

to meet other rivers. The castle of the Prince illuminates 
the hearts every night and men praise God 

for having so munificently granted beauty and tranquility. 
 

Lίchtensteίn, 29.10.2004 

 
Translated by:  Irena Ioannides

 
Αντάμωσα το Φθινόπωρο στο Λιχτενστάιν. Είχε τα χαλιά 
του κίτρινα, κόκκινα, χρυσά στους θάμνους, το γρασίδι 

και τα καλντερίμια ψιλόβρεχε 
κι ένας μικρός σκαντζόχοιρος 

κρύφτηκε στ' ακανθωτό καβούκι του. Θαύμασα τη σοφία 
του Θεού. 

Τα σκολιαρόπαιδα με μάτια αστραφτερά κι ένα μικρό 
χαμόγελο στην άκρη των χειλιών βιαστικά με 

προσπερνούσαν 
φορώντας τις χρωματιστές κουκούλες τους. Στο 

Λιχτενστάιν η ομορφιά είναι διάχυτη 
στ' ανθισμένα παρτέρια σε κάθε γωνιά, 

στα ψηλά βουνά με χιονισμένες κορφές και στις αέναες 
νεροσυρμές του Ρήνου που κυλά Θίκός 

v' ανταμώσει τ' άλλα ποτάμια. O πύργος του Πρίγκηπα 
κάθε βράδυ φωτίζει τις καρδιές κι οι άνθρωποι ευλογούν 
τον Θεό που τόσο απλόχερα χάρισε την ομορφιά και τη 

γαλήνη. 
 

Λιχτενστάιν, 29. 10.2004 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            19        

 
 

  

[Index] 

Anthias Tefkros (1903 – 1968) 
 

Anthias Tefkros was born in Kontea 1903 and died in London England 1968. His real 
name is Andreas Paulou. He also use the nick name Andreas Philotheous, also C, Rayias. His 
main poem is “Ta sfirigmata tou aliti” the whistle of a punk. Mainly in his poems he uses 
ironic tone and also he is very sarcastic.  
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Κοντέα το 1903 και πέθανε στο Λονδίνο το 1 968. Το πραγματικό 
του όνομα ήταν Ανδρέας Παύλου- Κατά καιρούς χρησιμοποίησε και άλλα ψευδώνυμα 
(Ανδρέας Φιλόθεου, Κ. Ραγιάς κ.ά.). Το σημαντικότερο του έργο είναι « Τα σφυρίγματα του 
Αλήτη», που τον καθιερώνουν στα νεοελληνικά γράμματα. Στην ποίηση του κυριαρχεί η 
ειρωνεία και ο σαρκασμός. Η ποίησή του έχει έντονο κοινωνικό χαρακτήρα και φαίνεται να 
είναι άμεσα  επηρεασμένη από τον Κ. Βάρναλη. 
 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            20        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

SONG TO THE SUN 
 

ΤΡΑΓΟΥΔΙ ΣΤΟ ΗΛΙΟ 

 
 

To look at you with head high was my dream 
proud voyager of the heavens, 

Sun, father of life, worshipped by the humble 
who yearn for your warm, shining embrace. 

 
To see celebrations all around, everything dizzy 

beneath the silver laughter of your light, 
in the flowers and trees the sap flowing 

and the buds awakening from their sweet sleep. 
 

Roses bursting forth, jasmine opening and in the breast 
where the heart had withered and aged 

youth and joy triumphantly becoming masters, 
-let the crowds of humble folk stand on their feet – 

 
Translated by: John Corbidge 

 

 
Να σε κοιτάξω ε’ πόθησα μ’ ολόρθο το κεφάλι, 

περήφανε ταξιδευτή των ουρανών, 
Ήλιε, πατέρα της ζωής, λατρεία των ταπεινών, 

που λαχταρούνε τη θερμή, τη φωτεινή σου αγκάλη 
 

Νάνε γιορτή ολοτρόγυρα, τα πάντα να μεθάνε 
κάτω απ’ το γέλιο του φωτός σου το ασημί 

 στάνθη, στα δέντρα, ορμητικά να τρέχουνε οι χυμοί, 
και τα μπουμπούκια απ’ το γλυκό τους ύπνο να ξυπνάνε 

 
Ρόδα να σκανε, γιασεμιά ν’ ανοίγουν, και στα στήθη, 

όπου μαράζωσε και γέρασε η καρδιά, 
να διαφεντέψουν θριαμβικά κ’ η νιότη και η χαρά, 

-να στυλωθούν στα πόδια τους των ταπεινών τα πλήθη – 
 

 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            21        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 

Christofides Andreas (1937 – 1998) 
 

Andreas Christophides was born in Nicosia in 1937 and died in 1998. He studied 
Philosophy in Athens, and Paedagogics and Mass Media in the US. He worked in Secondary 
Education, and in Public Broadcasting as Director General. He also served as Government 
Spokesman and as Minister of Education and Culture. He wrote and published numerous 
books of poetry, prose, essays and studies. He was also a regular contributor to dailies and 
magazines in Cyprus and abroad. He was honored with many local and international awards 
and distinctions. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Λευκωσία, σπούδασε Φιλοσοφία στην Αθήνα και Παιδαγωγικά και 
Μέσα Μαζικής Ενημέρωσης στην Αμερική. Εργάστηκε στη Μέση Εκπαίδευση, στη Δημόσια 
Ραδιοφωνία ως  Διευθυντής Προγραμμάτων Ραδιοφώνου και Γενικός Διευθυντής. Διετέλεσε  
Κυβερνητικός Εκπρόσωπος και Υπουργός Παδείας. Έγραψε ποίηση, πεζά, δοκίμια, μελέτες. 
Ήταν επίσης τακτικός συνεργάτης εφημερίδων και περιοδικών της Κύπρου και του 
εξωτερικού. Τιμήθηκε με πολλές διακρίσεις, τόσο επιτοπίως όσο και διεθνώς.   
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            22        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

PRAGUE, June 30, 1968 

 

 

ΠΡΑΓΑ 30 Ιουνίου 68 

 
 
 

Do not wait for me in the shadows of the room 
each night as I open the door 

to the dull hotel where I am staying. 
 

Do not wait for me at the street’s bend 
                                where I turn 
where I start wandering aimlessly 

                                           in the mornings 
and do not even come to Kanopiste 

as I ascend the steps which lead to the castle 
and I will try to forget you 

in the two slanted eyes which won’t even look at me 
so that later I ay begin putting out the candles as in a 

ritual 
with the bear tips of my fingers 

to carry 
the fire from the point where it burns 

to the point where it simply hurts. 
Iconographisi Xeni, 1969      

 
 

Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

 
 

 
 

Μη με περιμένεις στις σκιές της κάμαρης 
κάθε βράδυ σαν ανοίγω την πόρτα 

στο πληκτικό ξενοδοχείο όπου διαμένω. 
Μη με περιμένεις στη στροφή του δρόμου όθε περνώ 
τα πρωινά καθώς αρχίζω τ΄άσκοπα περιδιαβάσματα       

κι ούτε στο Κονοπίστε να έλθεις    
σαν θ΄ανεβαίνω τα σκαλιά που οδηγούν στο κάστρο 

 
κι εγώ θα δοκιμάσω να σε ξεχάσω 

μέσα σε δυο μάτια λοξά που δε θα με κοιτάζουν καν 
για ν΄αρχίσω αργότερα τελετουργικά να σβήνω τα κεριά 

με τα γυμνά μου δάκτυλα 
να μεταφέρω 

τη φωτιά από εκεί που καίει 
εκεί που απλώς πονεί.  

 
 
 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 
 
 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            23        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
 

 

August 21, 1968 

« virtuous life keeps the soul 
dry and intelligent. » 

Heraclitus 
 

 

21 Αυγούστου 1968 

«αύη ψυχή σοφοτάτη και 
αρίστη» 

Ηράκλειτος 
 

 Liquid soul liquid soul  
You must pass through fire 

must know hunger thirst illness and foremost father war  
do not die during sleep  

in order to wake without memory next morning sleep 
awake, be alert in your dreams resurrected in the night  

and die at dawn  
liquid soul liquid soul  
remember remember  

not the outlines, the details  
the eyes that shut the pores that close the elongated 

shadows  
let us not be oblivious in sleep liquid soul  

each moment you must walk backwards experience all 
that is rotten  

travel with the black birds  
ride the dark horses  

nest in all the dim places with the bats of night with the 
bats of day  

and do not allow yourself to sleep keep seeing do not shut  
not for a moment your eyes  

when you pass through the circles of pyre remember  
as you dry tears with the flame the long night's 

following day thunder governs all. 
 

 
Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

Υγρή ψυχή υγρή ψυχή 
Θα πρέπει να περάσεις από τη φωτιά 

να γνωρίσεις την πείνα τη δίψα την την αρρώστια 
και προπαντός τον πόλεμο πατέρα 

μην πεθαίνεις στον ύπνο 
για να ξυπνάς τ΄άλλο πρωί χωρίς μνήμη 

να κοιμάσαι ξύπνια να γρηγορείς στα όνειρα 
τη νύχτα ν ΄ανασταίνεσαι 
και να πεθαίνεις την αυγή 
υγρή ψυχή υγρή ψυχή 
να θυμάσαι να θυμάσαι 

όχι τα περιγράμματα, τις λεπτομέρειες 
τα μάτια που σβήνουν τους πόρους που κλείνουν 

τις επιμηκυσμένες σκιές 
μην είμαστε ληθαίοι στον ύπνο 

υγρή ψυχή 
κάθε στιγμή να περπατάς ανάστροφα 
να ζήσεις όλα τα σαθρά που ευρίσκει 
να ταξιδέψεις με τα μαύρα πουλιά 

να καβαλλικέψεις τα σκοτεινά άλογα 
κούρνιασε σ΄όλα τα ζοφερά μέρη 

με τις νυχτερίδες της νύχτας 
με τις νυχτερίδες της μέρας 
μην αφεθείς να κοιμηθείς 

να βλέπεις μην κλείσεις μια στιγμή τα μάτια 
όταν περνάς από τους πυρωμένους κύκλους 

να θυμάσαι καθώς στεγνώνεις τα δάκρυα με τη φλόγα 
την άλλη μέρα της μακρυνής νύχτας 

τα πάντα οιακίζει ο κεραυνός. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            24        

 
 

  

 
 

DREAMS   

 

 

Τα Όνειρα 

 
Dreams walk quietly at night  

they return to the common places of the first days  
look through the open windows at those who sleep 

carefully select the rooms where they will spend the night 
touching defenseless limbs and move the lids  

(as if behind them the eyes are gazing at  
the infinite curves and corners of the universe in an 

endless expansion) 
 lightly touching the unsuspecting forehead and temples.  

With dawn they return to the tombs of their childhood 
days. 

 
Conversations of the night,1979 
 
 

Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 
 

Τη νύχτα περπατούνε σιωπηλά τα όνειρα 
επιστρέφουν στους κοινούς τόπους των πρώτων ημερών 
κοιτάζουν από τ΄ανοιχτά παράθυρα τους κοιμισμένους 

επιλέγουν με προσοχή τα δωμάτια όπου θα 
διανυκτερεύσουν 

ψαύουν τα ανυπεράσπιστα μέλη και κινούν τα βλέφαρα 
(ως πίσω τους τα μάτια αντικρύζουνε σε ατέλειωτο 

άπλωμα 
τις άπειρες καμπύλες και τις γωνίες του σύμπαντος) 
ελαφρά εγγίζουν τα ανύποπτα μέτωπα και τους 

κροτάφους. 
Με την αυγή γυρίζουνε στων παιδικών καιρών τους 

τάφους. 
 

 
 
 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
  



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            25        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 

Alithersis Glafcos (1897 – 1965) 
 

Glafkos Alithersis (1897-1965), one of the most prolific and active poets between the 
wars, lived his most creative years in Alexandria (1919-1963). His first collection of poetry, 
Little Blue Rings 1919, was dedicated to Palamas. The lyricism that characterizes his poetic 
incursions into poetry of the Palamas style, also typifies that of his next collection: Κρινάκια 
του γιαλού(1921). The Secret Dinner (1944; second ed. 1956) is perhaps the most perfect of 
his works 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

 Γεννήθηκε στη Λεμεσό το 1897 και πέθανε το 1965. Το πραγματικό του όνομα ήταν 
Μιχάλης Χατζηδημητρίου. Έζησε για πολλά χρόνια στην Αλεξάνδρεια, όπου συνδέθηκε 
στενά με τους εκεί πνευματικούς κύκλους. Επηρεάστηκε από τα ποιητικά ρεύματα της 
Αθήνας (Παλαμά, Γρυπάρη, Μαλακάση) και αυτή η επίδραση είναι εμφανής στο έργο του. 
Στην Αλεξάνδρεια, όπου τα χρόνια εκείνα δέσποζε η ποιητική μορφή του Καβάφη, ο 
Αλιθέρσης θα εγκαταλείψει τον καβαφικό κύκλο και θα παραμείνει ως το τέλος 
αντικαβαφικός. Τα ποιήματά του τα χαρακτηρίζει ο έντονος λυρισμός, που οδηγείται σ' ένα 
βαθύ μυστικισμό. Εκτός από ποίηση έγραψε διηγήματα, καθώς και δυο τραγωδίες. 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            26        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

To My father 

 

 

ΣΤΟΝ ΠΑΤΕΡΑ ΜΟΥ 

 
 

Fraudulent time, the usual traitor, had already  
whitened your hair when  I met you, an old  

Crippled man, one leg upon the ferry  
that was to carry you to Acheron’s darkness. 

 
Now I can imagine you in your prime,  

the handsome farmer, innocently strong,  
a ploughman for Messaria,  
a God for your simplicity; 

 
Bending on the handle of plough  

to toil for future, or at leisure  
in the evening, taking delight in the heroic. 

 
Legend of your race, while I, your child,  

your poet,  
pulsed and thrived in your blood. 

 
Translated by :Andonis Decavalles 

 

 
Σε γνώρισα ασπρισμένο, απ’ τον προδότη 

κι ύπουλο χρόνο, γέρο και σακάτη, 
σαν το ’να πόδι σου στη βάρκα επάτη, 
που στ’ Άχερούσια θα σε οδήγαε σκότη. 

 
Σε φαντάζομαι τώρα όπως στη νιότη 
σου, δυνατό και ξέγνοιαστο χωριάτη, 

στης Μεσαριάς τους κάμπους ζευγολάτη, 
κι ωραίο μέσα στη θεϊκή σου απλότη, 

 
σκυμμένο στο χερούλια τ’ αλετριού, 
να μοχτάς για το μέλλο, ή στην αργία  
των δειλινών, να τέρπεσαι στου λαού 

 
την ηρωική, μυθικήν εποποιία, 

και μέσα στην ιερή συγκίνησή σου, 
να σφύζω εγώ, παιδί σου και ποιητής σου! 

 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            27        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

Charalambides Kyriakos (1940) 
 

Kyriakos Charalambides was born in Famagusta in 1940. He studied History and 
Archaeology in Athens. He worked at the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation and retired as 
Head of Radio Programmes. He has published numerous collections of poetry, translations 
and essays. He has received the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry, the Prize for Poetry by the 
Academy of Athens, the National Prize for Poetry in Greece, and the Cavafy Prize in Egypt. 
 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 

  
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Αμμόχωστο και σπούδασε Ιστορία και Αρχαιολογία στην Αθήνα. 
Εργάστηκε στο Ραδιοφωνικό Ίδρυμα Κύπρου απ΄όπου αφυπηρέτησε από τη θέση του 
Διευθυντή Προγραμμάτων Ραδιοφώνου.Δημοσίευσε ποίηση, λογοτεχνικές μεταφράσεις, 
δοκίμια. Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης στην Κύπρο και στην Ελλάδα, με το 
Βραβείο Ποίησης της  Ακαδημίας Αθηνών και με το Βραβείο Καβάφη στην Αίγυπτο.   
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            28        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Missing Person 

 

 

Ο ΑΓΝΟΟΥΜΕΝΟΣ 

 
 

The old man tied his leg to the chair,  
intending to sleep deep down in Hades,  
when suddenly he heard his son saying  
“Don’t  die, father, hang on, I’m coming.” 
His son spoke from behind the mountain,  

hedged round with iron pitchforks,  
he had a curved waist, his hands were tributaries.  

“Father I’m alive I tell you, I’well.  
My strength has become a plate of broth.  
I’m hungry, I’m shivering, but it’s nothing.  

Or if if I died, it’s only raining – it must be an illness.  
In my murderer’s hand I count a thousand drops of blood.  

I brush off the fly of life, weep in secret, and send you  
my being to keep – no tears, father.” 

The old man sat up straight in his black breeches 
 and filled his surroundings with a wild lament.  

And he managed, for his child’s sake,  
to turn his grief into white, into saffron stones,  

Through the deep arch and the window he struggles  
to grasp the Morning Star, his son’s leg. 

 
Translated by: Kimon Friar 

 

 
Ο γέρος έδεσε το πόδι του από την καρέκλα 
και σκόπευε να κοιμηθεί κατάχαμα στον ’Αδη, 

όταν αντίκρυσε το γιο του να του λέει: 
«Πατέρα, μην πεθαίνεις, στάσου κι έρχομαι». 

 
Πίσω από το βουνό μιλούσε ο γιος του 
περιφραγμένος με τα σιδερά δικράνια 

και με καμπύλη μέση και με χέρια παραπόταμα. 
«Πατέρα, ζω σου λέω, είναι καλά. 

Η δύναμή μου γίνεται μια σούπα κρέατος. 
Πεινώ και τρέμω, αλλά δεν είναι τίποτα. 

’Η, αν πεθαίνω, βρέχει -  αρρώστια θα ’ναι. 
Στο χέρι του φονιά μου να μετρώ χίλια αίματα. 

Τη μύγα του θανάτου διώχνω, κλαίω κρυφά, σου στέλλω 
την ύπαρξή μου να την σκέπεις, όχι κλάματα, πατέρα». 

Ο γέρος ανακάθισε στη μαύρη βράκα του 
κι έβαλεν άγριο θρήνο γύρω γύρω. 

Και το κατόρθωσε, για του παιδιού του το χατήρι, 
λιθάρια ο θρήνος άσπρα κροκωτά να γίνει. 
Με το βαθύ αγωνίζεται παράθυρο και τόξο 
να πιάσει τον αυγερινό, πόδι του γιού του. 

 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            29        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Michanikos Pantelis (1926 – 1979) 
 

His first poems were published in a magazine called Kipriaka Grammata (Cyprus 
letters) in 1952 until 1954, He awarded first price on poetry from the above magazine. He 
writes in plain language. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 
 

Πρωτοπαρουσιάστηκε στα Γράμματα μέσα από τις στήλες του περιοδικού Κυπριακά 
Γράμματα το 1952.  Tο 1954 πήρε πρώτο βραβείο στον Πανελλήνιο διαγωνισμό που 
προκήρυξαν τα Κυπριακά Γράμματα.  Ο λόγος του είναι γνήσιος, ζεστός αλλά και απλός που 
μοιάζει με κουβέντα που ακούεις στον δρόμο.   
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            30        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

LETTER. 

 

 

Γράμμα 

 
My dear mother 

Your love, 
I must inform you 

Is burdening my life, 
In this place there is no alternative for me.  

I walk the streets 
With my existence written on the soles of my shoes  

Squeezed by every step I take.  
At one time or another we take off  

A shoe and fling it into the air  
For we simply have to play.  

One day I might succeed in losing it  
In the noise of the crowd, together with  
What has been written underneath it. 

You told me not to do this sort of thing 
But I am just writing to tell you that  

I cannot do otherwise.  
I cannot begin to thank you,  

Your love drags me by the hair  
And diminishes my strength at this  
Critical moment when I am fighting  

With my whole being to refresh 
My dizzy convictions only by a handkerchief dipped in 

blood. 
 

Translated by: Lawrence Durrell` 

 

Αγαπητή μου μητέρα, 
Η Αγάπη σου, 
σε πληροφορώ 

μου δυσκολεύει τη ζωή. 
Εδώ πέρα δεν υπάρχει άλλη διέξοδος. 

περπατώ στους δρόμους 
με την ύπαρξή μου γραμμένη κάτω απ’ τα παπούτσια μου, 

που τη ζουλεί το κάθε μου πάτημα. 
Καμιά φορά βγάζουμε το παπούτσι μας 

και το πετάμε στον αέρα, 
γιατί είναι ανάγκη να παίξουμε. 

Κάποια μέρα μπορεί να το χάσω μέσα σ’ αυτη την 
οχλοβοή 

μαζί με ό,τι έχει γραμμένο από κάτω. 
Εσύ μου είπες να μην τα κάνω όλ’ αυτά. 

Μα ακριβώς σου γράφω για να σε πληροφορήσω πως 
δεν γίνεται διαφορετικά. 

Δεν μπορώ να σ’ ευχαριστήσω. 
Η αγάπη σου με τραβά από τα μαλλιά, όταν εγώ μάχομαι 

ολάκερος, 
μ’ αποσπά δυνάμεις, 

αυτή την κρίσιμη στιγμή, 
που μόνο με μαντήλια βρεμένα στο αίμα 

προσπαθούμε να δροσίσουμε το μέτωπο των ζαλισμένων 
μας πεποιθήσεων. 

«Παρεκκλίσεις» 1957 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            31        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Kranidiotis Nicos (1911 – 1997) 
 

Nikos Kranidiotis was born in Kyrenia in 1911, and died in Athens in1997. He studied 
in Athens and in the USΑ. He worked as a teacher in Secondary Education, and served as 
Ambassador of Cyprus to Greece. He wrote poetry, prose, literary criticism, essays, etc. He 
was a member of the group which produced the periodical "Cyprus Letters," for which he was 
awarded the Gold Medal of the Academy of Athens. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην  Κερύνεια το 1911 και πέθανε το 1997. Σπούδασε στην Αθήνα και 
Αμερική, διετέλεσε Kαθηγητής Mέσης Eκπαίδευσης και Πρέσβης της Κύπρου στην Ελλάδα. 
Έγραψε ποιήματα, κριτικές κ.α.. Διετέλεσε μέλος του περιοδικού Κυπριακά Γράμματα για το 
οποίο βραβεύτηκε με το Χρυσό Μετάλλιο της Ακαδημίας Αθηνών. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            32        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Europe in Kerkyra 

Written on the occasion of the Corfu 

European Council Summit (June 24 

– 25 ,1994) 

 

 

H Ευρώπη στην Κέρκυρα 

Γράφτηκε με την ευκαιρία της 

Ευρωπαικής Συνόδου Κορυφής στην 

Κέρκυρα (1994) 

 
 

That night in June 
Spianada was full of people. 

Sitting at an open-air coffee shop as I was 
everyting passing before me like visions. 

 
And then you came, a cool breath of wing,  

holding all the stars in your apron. 
 

I looked up:  the sky was bare 
You had wrapped yourself in the Zodiac’s ring 

and Sagittarius was sparkling in your hair. 
 

You touched me and my body and sould bloomed 
a new sprout. 

Our bodies merged 
and our loins shone like lightning. 

 
I said to you: 

Wear the moon in your hair no more, 
the Summint is underway 
and everyone is protesting 

that you have taken the full moon from the Castle. 
 

But obstinate you held it 
around your naked body like a tunic. 

I was on fire, nto saying a word, 
since the wind was stealing my breath, 

turning it into an echo in the night, 

 
Κείνο το βράδυ του Ιουνίου 

η Σπιανάδα ήταν γεμάτη κόσμο. 
Καθόμουν σ’ ένα υπαίθριο καφενείο 

κι όλα περούσανε σαν οπτασίες μπροστά μου. 
 

Ύστερα ήρθες,  δρεσερή πνοή ανέμου, 
κρατώντας στην ποδιά σου όλα τ’ άστρα. 

 
Κοίταξα επάνω: Ο ουρανός ήτανε άδειος. 

Είχες ζωστεί τον κύκλο των ζωδίων 
κι έλαμπε ο Τοξότης στα μαλλιά σου. 

 
Μ’ άγγιξες κι άνθισε 

νέος βλαστός το σώμα κι η ψυχή μου. 
Σμίξανε τα κορμιά μας 

κι έλαμψε αστραπή η οσφύ μας. 
 

Σου είπα:  
Μη φοράς άλλο το φεγγάρι στα μαλλιά σου, 

γιατί είναι τώρα το Συνέδριο Κορυφής 
κι όλοι διαμαρτύρονται 

που πήρες την πανσέληνο απ’ το Κάστρο. 
 

Όμως εσύ με πείσμα την κρατούσες 
στ’ ολόγυμνο κορμί σου σαν χιτώνα. 

Εγώ φλεγόμουνα, χωρίς ν’ αθρώσω λέξη, 
γιατί έπαιρνε ο αγέρας τη λαλιά μου, 

την έκανε ηχώ μέσα στη νύχτα, 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            33        

 
 

  

a psalm of the church, a cry of Cyprus. 
 

Just as the trumpets sounded at the Castle 
glorious we both entered 

tche palaces of Michael and Georgios. 
 

Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

 

ψαλμό της εκκλησιάς, κραυγή της Κύπρου. 
 

Όσο που ηχήσανε οι σάλπιγγες στο Κάστρο 
και μπήκαμε κι οι δύο γεμάτοι κλέος 

στ’ ανάκτορα των Μιχαήλ και Γεωργίου. 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            34        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

LITTLE TOWN OF CYPRUS 

 

 

ΠΟΛΗ ΜΙΚΡΗ ΤΗΣ ΚΥΠΡΟΥ 

 
 
 

O little town of Cyprus under clear 
Deep sapphire skies, In your pure atmosphere 

Fond memory lies 
Of many a youthful year. 

 
Bold were the schemes And fresh the dreams 

Voluptuous innocence; Now storm and wrack Turn my 
thoughts back 

Away from passions tense. 
 

O little town, hold, hold tonight 
My thoughts in tenderness. Illusion drove me in wild flight 

Far from the shore that stretches bright 
In pebbled loveliness. 

 
Translated by: Andre Michalopoulos 

 
 

Πόλη μικρή της Κύπρου, με το διαυγή 
από γαλάζιο σάπφειρο ουρανόν! 
Μες στην ατμόσφαιρά σου η ηδονή 
πλανάται των νεανικών μου ετών. 

 
Η ηδονή των τολμηρών σχεδίων, 
των πρώιμων αγνών επιθυμιών... 

κι η σκέψη μου ως ναυαγημένο πλοίον 
γυρνάει σε σέ απ’ τις τρικυμίες των παθών. 

 
Κράτησε – κράτησε, πόλη, απόψε τρυφερά 

τη μνήμη μου, κι οδήγησέ με πάλι 
ταξιδευτή χιμαιροπλόκο, νοερά 

εξορμητή απ’ το’ ωραίο σου ακρογιάλι. 
« Σπουδές» 

 
 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            35        

 
 

  

[Index]  

 

Ioannides Klitos (1944) 
 

Klitos Ioannides was born in Moutoulas village, in 1944. He studied in Cyprus and 
France where he received his Ph.D. in Philosophy. He has worked as a teacher, lecturer and 
researcher. He has published poetry, essays, studies, monographs and numerous books on 
Oral History. He has written and published the History of Contemporary Cypriot Literature 
and numerous books on Orthodoxy and Philosophy. He is a regular contributor to 
newspapers, magazines, radio and television. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στο Μουτουλά, το 1944.Σπούδασε στην Κύπρο και στη Γαλλία. Είναι 
κάτοχος διδακτορικού στη Φιλοσοφία.Εργάστηκε σαν δάσκαλος,υφηγητής και 
ερευνητής.Έγραψε και δημοσίευσε ποίηση,δοκίμια, μελέτες,μονογραφίες και πληθώρα 
βιβλίων Προφορικής Ιστορίας.Έγραψε και δημοσίευσε την Ιστορία της Σύγχρονης 
Κυπριακής Λογοτεχνίας καθώς και πληθώρα βιβλίων για την Ορθοδοξία και τη 
Φιλοσοφία.Είναι τακτικός συνεργάτης εφημερίδων,περιοδικών,του ραδιοφώνου και της 
τηλεόρασης. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            36        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

NEOLITHIC AGE 

 

 

ΝΕΟΛΙΘΙΚΗ ΕΠΟΧΗ 

 

 
In your recent song 

beloved 
your write consolingly 

“I am you” 
and the potter´s field 

was replaced 
by the field of love. 

 
You were pierced by a lance, you said, 

and the impenetrable hills 
of time 

were silenced. 
Janus was overcome. 

 
On these Alps of recognition 

were heard 
ories of love 

indifference reigned. 
See how we swallowed 

the summit of grief 
the Rhine of the devil. 

And I come 
partaker of the divine nature 

man and god 
to taste your forbidden 

Sinai 
the indifference of your endless 

lust. 
 

Thus I gecame familiar 
with the occult life 

of the gulf of your loins 

Στο πρόσφατο άσμα σου 
αδελφιδή 

γράφεις παρηγορητικά 
το «είμαι εσύ» 

κι αντικαταστάθηκε 
ο αγρός του κεραμέως 
με τον αγρό του έρωτα. 

 
Λόγχη εκεντήθης, είπες 

και σίγησαν 
τ’ αδιαπέραστα βουνά 

του χρόνου. 
Νικήθηκε ο Ιανός. 

 
Στις ’Αλπεις αυτές της αναγνώρισης 

ακούστηκαν 
αλαλγμοί ερωτικοί 
ήχησε η αδιαφορία. 

 

Ιδού πώς καταπονήθηκε 
η κορυφή της θλίψης 
ο Ρήνος του διαβόλου. 

 
Κι έρχομαι 

κοινωνός θείας φύσεως 
και θεάνθρωπος 

να γευτώ το απαγορευμένο σου 
Σινά 

την ακηδία της ατέρμονης σου 
ηδονής. 

 
’Ετσι γνώρισα 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            37        

 
 

  

the black forest of your embrace. 
Life giving spring 

and idleness of zeal 
you cried out, 

the limits of my body 
the limits of my tongue. 

 

 

Translated by : Rea Frangofinou 

την απόκρυφη ζωή 
του μορφικού σου κόλπου 

το μέλανα δρυμό της  αγκαλιάς σου. 
Ζωοδόχος πηγή 

και ραθυμία ζήλου 
ανέκραξες, 

τα όρια του σώματός μου 
τα όρια της γλώσσας μου. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            38        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

Ierodiakonou Andriana (1952) 

 
Andriana lerodiaconou was born in Nicosia in 1952, and attended The English School. 

After graduating from Oxford University with a degree in Biochemistry, she pursued a career 
as a foreign correspondent. She lives in France with her family. She has been publishing 
poetry since 1980. Her work has appeared in a wide range of literary magazines in Cyprus 
and abroad, and has been included in several anthologies. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Λευκωσία το 1952.Φοίτησε στην Αγγλική σχολή και ακολούθως 
σπούδασε βιοχημεία στο Πανεπιστήμιο της Οξφόρδης.Ζει στη Γαλλία με την οικογένειά της. 
Εργάστηκε ως ξένος ανταποκριτής.Γράφει και δημοσιεύει ποίηση  και πεζογραφήματα από 
το 1980. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            39        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Breughel the Elder:  The fall of 

Icarus 

 

 

Breughel o πρεσβύτερος:  Η πτώση 

του ‘Ικαρου 

 
Know, that what the Fates have given you 

They denied to others.  And besides: 
It is a glorious thing, but bitter. 

The fair day, the horse-plough in the sun 
Are not for you; your lot, to see  

With clarity that Icarus is falling –  
(you have the meaning of it) – in the water. 

 
Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

 
Ξέρε, ότι αυτό που σου έδωκαν οι Μοίρες 

σε άλλους το στέρησαν.  Και ακόμα:  
είναι δοξασμένο, μα πικρό. 

Η αίθρια μέρα, το άροτρο στον ήλιο 
δεν είναι για σένα· εσέ, το τυχερό σου 

η ξεκάθαρη όψη του ‘Ικαρου που πέφτει –  
(το νόημα το κατέχεις) – στο νερό. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            40        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Joseph Josephides (1948) 
 

Josef Josefides was born in Larnaca in 1948. He studied Economics and Mathematics 
in Athens, and he holds a Ph.D. in Statistical Economics from Athens University. He writes 
and translates poetry from English to Greek and vice versa. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Λάρνακα το 1948. Σπούδασε Οικονομικά και Μαθηματικά στην 
Αθήνα και είναι κάτοχος διδακτορικού Στατιστικής Οικονομικών του Πανεπιστημίου 
Αθηνών. Γράφει και μεταφράζει ποίηση απο τα Αγγλικά στα Ελληνικά και απο τα Ελληνικά 
στα Αγγλικά. 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            41        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE WINDOW (Poetic Collection: 

WAY B') 

 

 

ΤΟ ΠΑΡΑΘΥΡΟ (Ποιητική Συλλογή : 

ΔΙΑΔΡΟΜΗ Β')  

 
 

 Stretch your hand and open the window, 
 

maybe a sunbeam drops in, 
in a zig-zag way, by reflection, maybe a star promising a 

change. 
Open the window, 

perhaps a person in rush drops a glance inside, a beauty 
girl sprinkled by the rain, a shallow mother who lost her 

baby. 
Open the window, 

maybe the ball of the children shows up their voice 
perhaps climbs up a bending branch, a kitten. 

 
Open the window, 

even if a wave of dust, of hail, invades, 
a shadow or its shadow, two shadows in one, or even a 

shadow shading another. 
 

Open the window, 
even if the city fell asleep, even if the city passed away, 

even if there is no sign which of the two. 
 

Stretch your hand and open for us the window. 
 

In its place there will be a painting hanged, speechless 
staring at us. At least it will fill our empty wall. 

Karlovivari - Prague, August, 2002 

 
Άπλωσε το χέρι κι άνοιξε το παράθυρο, 

 
ίσως το δρασκελίσει μια αχτίδα, τεθλασμένη, από 
αντανάκλαση, ένα άστρο που υπόσχεται αλλαγή. 

Άνοιξε το παράθυρο, 
ίσως κοιτάξει μέσα ένας βιαστικός, μια ωραία που τη 
ραίνει η βροχή, μια χελιδόνα που `χασε το μικρό της. 

 
Άνοιξε το παράθυρο, 

ίσως φανεί η μπάλα των παιδιών 
η φωνούλα τους ίσως σκαρφαλώσει ένα κλαρί που 

λυγίζει, ένα γατί. 
 

Άνοιξε το παράθυρο, 
κι ας εισβάλει κύμα σκόνης, χαλαζιού, μια σκιά ή η σκιά 
της, δύο που γίναν μία, ή έστω μια σκιά που σκιάζει μιαν 

άλλη. 
 

Άνοιξε το παράθυρο, 
ακόμα κι αν η πόλη αποκοιμήθηκε, ακόμη κι αν η πόλη 

αποδήμησε, 
ακόμη κι αν δε φαίνεται ποιο απ' τα δυο. 

Άπλωσε το χέρι κι άνοιξέ μας το παράθυρο. 
Στη θέση του θα υπάρχει μια ζωγραφιά κρεμασμένη, κι ας 
μας κοιτάζει αμίλητη. Τουλάχιστον θα γεμίζει τον άδειο 

μας τοίχο. 
Καρλοβιβάρι - 17Πράγα, Αύγουστος 2002 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            42        

 
 

  

 [Index] 
 
 Kouyialis Theoclis (1936) 
 

Theoklis Kouyialis was born in the village of Deftera in 1936. After graduating from 
the Morphou College of Education, he studied Paedagogics in the USΑ. He completed his 
post-graduate studies in London. He worked in Education, retiring as Director of Primary 
Education. He has published several collections of poetry, anthologies, monographs and 
studies. He has been awarded the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Δευτερά, το 1936. Φοίτησε στο Διδασκαλικό Κολλέγιο Μόρφου και 
σπούδασε Παιδαγωγικά στις ΗΠΑ. Συμπλήρωσε τις μεταπτυχιακές σπουδές του στο 
Λονδίνο. Εργάστηκε στην εκπαίδευση απ΄οπου αφυπηρέτησε απο τη θέση του διευθυντή 
Στοιχειώδους Εκπαίδευσης. Έγραψε και εξέδωσε πολλά βιβλία ποίησης, ανθολογίες, 
μονογραφίες και μελέτες. Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης. 
  

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            43        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
 

THE DOG WHO STOPPED BARKING 
 

 

ΤΟ ΣΚΥΛΙ ΠΟΥ ΣΤΑΜΑΤΗΣΕ ΤΟ 

ΓΑΒΓΙΣΜΑ 
 

For years he barked normally 
Which means he barked whenever he should have And 

then he stopped. 
A dog who doesn't bark is useless 

And so they gave him to understand that it was time to get 
out of the corner. Now that he walks alone in the field 

In that field where the summer sun mercilessly beats him 
He reflects on the human antics of dogs 

The life he wasted among humans until he arrived at the 
painful decision 

to renounce all he had earned with so many sacrifices and 
so much effort! 

And he brings to mind all those 
Dogs and others – 

Who bark continuously without meaning 
Who do not stop their prattling and empty barking 

Who do not have self-knowledge and go and identify with 
humans They acquire human habits 

And finally forget that after all they belong to the honoured 
family of dogs. 

Such things did he think and grief seized him deeply and 
his soul pined Such things and the night descended like 

rain on his coat. 
In my view the successful dog is not he who relaxes on a 
carved armchair Nor he who has won the confidence of 

humans But he who proceeds even though alone He who 
feels and behaves like a dog 

Who barks without self-interest 
What has happened, anyway, to the honesty, purity, and 

that which 
our grandfathers called doglike? 

Such things did he soliloquize and went his own way The 
dog who stopped barking. 

 

Translated by: David Bailey 

 

Για χρόνια γάβγιζε κανονικά 
Που σημαίνει γάβγιζε όποτε έπρεπε 

Κι ύστερα σταμάτησε. 
Ένα σκυλί που δεν γαβγίζει είναι άχρηστο 

Γι’ αυτό του ’δωσαν να καταλάβει πως ήταν καιρός ν’ 
αδειάσει τη γωνιά. 

Τώρα που περπατά ολομόναχο μέσα στον κάμπο 
Σ’ αυτό τον κάμπο που τον δέρνει ανελέητα ο ήλιος του 

καλοκαιριού 
Συλλογίζεται τ’ ανθρώπινα καμώματα των σκυλιών 
Τη ζωή του που χαράμισε κοντά στους ανθρώπους 

ώσπου να 
 φτάσει στην οδυνηρή απόφαση ν’ απαρνηθεί 

όσα κέρδισε με  
 τόσες θυσίες και τόση προσπάθεια! 

Και φέρνει στο νου του όλους εκείνους 
-Σκύλους και μη- 

Που γαβγίζουν συνέχεια χωρίς νόημα 
Που δε σταματούν τη φλυαρία και τα παχιά γαβγίσματα 

Που δεν έχουν το γνώθι σαυτόν και παν και ταυτίζονται με 
τους ανθρώπους 

Αποκτούν ανθρώπινες συνήθειες 
Και τέλος ξεχνούν πως στο κάτω κάτω ανήκουν στην 

τιμημένη  
 οικογένεια των σκυλιών. 

 
Τέτοια συλλογιζόταν κι η θλίψη τον κυρίευε βαθιά κι η 

ψυχή του μαράζωνε 
Τέτοια κι η νύχτα κατέβαινε σαν βροχή πάνω στο τρίχωμα 

του. 
 

-Το κατ’ εμένα επιτυχεμένος σκύλος δεν είν’ εκείνος που  
 αναπαύεται σε σκαλιστή πολυθρόνα 
Ούτε εκείνος που κέρδισε την εμπιστοσύνη των 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            44        

 
 

  

 ανθρώπων 
Αλλά εκείνος που προχωρεί έστω και μόνος 

Εκείνος που νιώθει και συμπεριφέρεται ως σκύλος 
Που γαβγίζει χωρίς ιδιοτέλεια. 

Που πήγε τελοσπάντων η τιμιότητα, η αγνότητα και αυτό 
που οι 

 παππούδες μας αποκαλούσαν σκυλισιά. 
 

Τέτοια μονολογούσε και πήγαινε κατά τον εαυτό του 
Το σκυλί που σταμάτησε το γάβγισμα. 

 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            45        

 
 

  

 
[Index] 

 
Krallis Manos (1914 – 1989) 
 

Manos Krallis was born in Nicosia in 1914, and died in 1989. He studied at the 
Pancyprian Teachers College, and worked as teacher and Headmaster, as well as at the 
Educational Broadcasting Service of the Cyprus Ministry of Education. He wrote poetry and 
literary criticism. He was awarded the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Λευκωσία, το 1914 και πέθανε το 1989. Φοίτησε στο διδασκαλικό 
Κολλέγιο και εργάστηκε σαν δάσκαλος, διευθυντής σχολείου και στην Υπηρεσία 
Εκπαιδευτικής Ραδιοφωνίας του Υπουργείου Παιδείας.  Έγραψε ποίηση και λογοτεχνική 
κριτική. Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό βραβείο Ποίησης. 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            46        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

MY BROTHERS 

 

 

ΑΔΕΛΦΟΙ ΜΟΥ! 

 
 

I saw your lips twitching among stars. 
I stretched my hands toward your nights of martyrdom: 

Your wrinkled faces refused to smile. 
I brought my tears to you. 

In my naked verse your race 
Paraded on wounded feet, 
O my wronged brothers. 

(In the abandoned evening 
Myriads of stars fall into your arms.) 

The lands stretch from my feet, 
As I set forth to meet you, my brothers, 

Forgotten even by death. 
I find you crouched in poor harbors, 

Wandering in lost tenements. 
And sit Sharing with you 

A glass of zivana. 
 
 
 
 

Translated by: Andones Decavalles

 
Είδα το στόμα σας κατάντικρυ στ’ αστέρια, 

που βογγούσεν· 
άπλωσα τα χέρια μου στις γήινες, μαρτυρικές σας νύχτες 

μα τα στυγνά, χαρακωμένα πρόσωπά σας 
δεν χαμογέλασαν. 

Σας έφερα τα δάκρυά μου 
και στους γυμνούς μου στίχους επορεύθη  

με πληγωμένα πόδια η φυλή σας, 
αδικημένοι αδερφοί μου. 

Κι όταν ο άγιος ίσκιος σας νυχτωθεί 
εντύθηκα τη φλόγα της ψυχής σας 

ως χλαμύδα 
 

Οι πολιτείες αρχίζουνε στα πόδια μου, για να σας 
συναντήσω 

στα φτωχολίμανα και στις χαμένες συνοικίες, 
γύρω σ’ ένα ποτήρι με τζιβάνα, 

λησμονημένους κι απ’ το θάνατον ακόμα 
αδερφοί, αδερφοί μου!... 
Τα ποιήματα (1936-1984) 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            47        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
 
Korfioti – Panayiotidou Vera (1940) 
 
Vera Panayiotidou Korfioti was born in Morphou. She studied History, Archaeology and 
Journalism in Athens. She worked as a teacher of Philology and as Headmistress in 
Secondary Education. She has published numerous collections of poetry, studies on Cypriot 
literature, and books on education. Among other distinctions for her writing, she has received 
Honorable Mentions from the Cyprus Ministry of Education. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Μόρφου. Σπούδασε ιστορία, Αρχαιολογία και Δημοσιογραφία στη 
Αθήνα. Εργάστηκε ως Καθηγήτρια και ως Διευθύντρια Σχολείου στη Μέση Εκπαίδευση. 
Δημοσίευσε πολλές ποιητικές συλλογές, μελέτες για την Κυπριακή Λογοτεχνία και βιβλία για 
την εκπαίδευση. Τιμήθηκε με Εύφημο Μνεία απο το Υπουργείο Παιδείας και με άλλες 
διακρίσεις.  

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            48        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

FOR MY SON 

 

ΓΙΑ ΤΟ ΓΙΟ ΜΟΥ 
 

How your love has trapped me, 
my child, 

controlling every breath 
censoring every moment. 

Your words, my boy,  
swallows that perch 

 on my fingers 
 and drink my soul. 

Your eyes, those eyes 
 heat the five continents. 

My child, the tightrope I walk thinking of you 
and like a leaf I tremble at your cry 

in the light of your laughter I recover my sight, my joy. 
From which sky have you descended, my star, 

from which almond tree have you fallen, my blossom. 
Rays of sunlight dance at your song, 

the skies fall silent at your sleep, 
and I walk the tightrope at your every breath. 

 
Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

     
Πώς με παγίδεψε η αγάπη σου 

παιδί μου, 
κι ελέγχει κάθε ανάσα μου 

και λογοκρίνει κάθε στιγμή μου. 
Τα λόγια σου αγόρι μου 
 αηδόνια που κάθονται 

 στα δάκτυλά μου  
και πίνουν την ψυχή μου. 
Τα μάτια σου, τα μάτια σου 

 ζεσταίνουν τις πέντε ηπείρους. 
Παιδί μου ακροβατώ στη σκέψη σου 
και τρέμω σα φύλλο στο κλάμα σου 

στο φως του γέλιου σου αναβλέπω, χαρά μου. 
Από ποιο ουρανό ήρθες, αστέρι μου, 
από ποια αμυγδαλιά έπεσες, ανθέ μου. 
Στο τραγούδι σου χορεύουν ηλιακτίδες 
στον ύπνο σου σιγάζουν οι ουρανοί 
κι εγώ ακροβατώ στην αναπνοή σου. 

«Ποιήματα» 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ]



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            49        

 
 

  

  
[Index] 

 
Lyssiotis Xanthos (1898 – 1987) 
 

Lyssiotis Xanthos was born in Larnaca in 1898. He first appears in the area  of Poetry  
around 1925, his first edition of poetry was released in 1937 (Efimera). His deep in lyrics he 
uses the style of Greek poets Palamas and sikelianos. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

 Γεννήθηκε στη Λάρνακα το 1898.  Πρωτοεμφανίστηκε στα γράμματα γύρω στα 
1925, αλλά η πρώτη συλλογή του κυκλοφόρησε στα 1937 (Εφήμερα).  Βαθειά λυρικός, 
μεγαλόπνοος και μεγαλοπρεπής στην ποίησή του, προεκτείνει την παράδοση του Παλαμά 
αλλά ιδιαίτερα του Σικελιανού. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            50        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE SHIP IS SETTING SAIL 

 

 

ΤΟ ΠΛΟΙΟ ΣΑΛΠΑΡΕΙ... 

 
Ah! the gentle light of the innocent gaze! 

I weave sails in its gleam, white sails, 
in order to traverse beyond bitter waves, 

escaping the terror of death. 
Poor bird ! your doleful April 

what ruinations have destroyed, poor bird! 
Only your glance secretly warbles to me now 

the trills the lips would have scattered. 
Your existence resembles a ship setting sail... 

Listen ! a tempest like fierce music 
vehement from the ravines of Judea 

is descending, my little one, to take you... 
As the angels' wings rustle woefully, 
O Lord ! quench the fire of the sighs! 
Beyond the shore of human grief’s, 

in the meadow of substanceless asphodels, 
the ugliness of our barren groans 

has been made beautiful in the shade of dreams. 
 

Translated by: Amy Mims 

 

 
Α! τ’ απαλό το φως τ’ αθώου βλεμμάτου! 

Πλέκω πανιά στο φέγγος του, λευκά πανιά, 
για να διαβώ πέρ’ από κύματα πικρά, 
ξεφεύγοντας τον τρόμο του θανάτου. 

 
Φτωχό πουλί!  Το θλιβερό σου Απρίλη 
τι χαλασμοί ρημάξανε, φτωχό πουλί! 

Μόνο η ματιά σου πια κρυφά μου κελαηδεί 
τις τρίλιες που θα σκόρπιζαν τα χείλη. 

 
Η ύπαρξη σου μοιάζει πλοίο που σαλπάρει... 

Άκου!  Μια τρικυμιά σαν άγρια μουσική 
απ’ της Ιουδαίας τα φαράγγια ορμητική 
κατεβαίνει, μικρό μου, να σε πάρει... 

 
Γοερά σα θροούν φτερούγες των αγγέλων, 
ω Κύριε!  σβύνε τη φωτιά των στεναγμών! 

Πέρ’ απ’ την όχθη των ανθρώπινων καημών, 
στο λειμώνα των άυλων ασφοδέλων, 

την ασκήμια τω βόγκων μας των στείρων 
ομόρφυνε στον ίσκιο των ονείρων. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            51        

 
 

  

[Index] 

Marangou Niki (1948 ) 
 
Marangou Niki was born in Limassol and studied in West Berlin. She worked as a 

dramaturge at the National Theatrical Organisation of Cyprus and, since 1980, has managed a 
bookstore in Nicosia. She has published poetry, prose and fairytales. She has repeatedly 
received the Cyprus State Prize both for poetry and prose. In 1998 she received the Cavafy 
Prize for Poetry in Egypt. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 
 
Γεννήθηκε στη Λεμεσό και σπούδασε στο Δυτικό Βερολίνο. Εργάστηκε ως 

δραματουργός στον Θεατρικό Οργανισμό Κύπρου. Από το 1980 διευθύνει ένα βιβλιοπωλίο 
στη Λευκωσία. Έχει δημοσιεύσει ποίηση, πεζό και παραμύθια. Έχει επανειλημμένα τιμηθεί 
με Κρατικά Βραβεία ποίησης και πεζογραφίας. Το 1998 τιμήθηκε με το Βραβείο Ποίησης 
Καβάφη στην Αλεξάνδρεια. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            52        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

VOYAGE OF THE ASTROLABE 

 

 

ΤΟ ΤΑΞΙΔΙ ΤΟΥ ΑΣΤΡΟΛΑΒΟΥ 

When I had forgotten Europe 
Waiting for me in Vilnius 
A row of lions and eagles 

In diving position on the pier 
On the small wooden shelf 
Over the portraits of those 

Who had helped 
And the seven dolls that were saved* 
Their clothing cleaned and mended 

Their wooden parts varnished and firmly fixed 
And their soft filling new, 

Saint Petersburng in the light rain 
I did not manage to see, 

Only among the national library´s books 
The librarian´s worn out shoes 

And the dying geranium on the windowsill, 
In Warsaw a woman walking incessantly 

Among the ruins 
Even though the performance had been added on, 

And the duck cooked to perfection. 
On the stations that followed 

With corinthian columns and with hammers and sickles 
Women selling wild-flower bouquets 

All along the railway tracks 
Or berries gathered in the forest 

That they would carry in plastic pails at dawn. 
A summer rushing past the train´s windows  

Like an old movie. 
 

And so the train arrived in Berlin 
And it would have been pointless to search for what was 

missing. 
I gathered all I had found on the trip, 

Εκεί που είχα ξεχάσει την Ευρώπη 
Στο Vilnius με περίμενε 

Μια σειρά από λιοντάρια και αετούς 
Σε θέση βουτηχτή στην αποβάθρα 

Στο ξύλινο ραφάκι 
Πάνω από τα πορτραίτα αυτών 

Που βοήθησαν 
Και οι εφτά κούκλες που σώθηκαν* 

Τα ρούχα τους καθαρισμένα και ραμμένα 
Τα ξύλινά τους μέρη βερνικωμένα και στερεωμένα 

Και η μαλακή τους γέμιση καινούρια, 
Την Αγία Πετρούπολη με ψιλή βροχή 
Δεν κατάφερα καθόλου να την δώ, 

Μόνο ανάμεσα στα βιβλία της εθνικής βιβλιοθήκης 
Τα τριμμένα παπούτσια της βιβλιοθηκάριου 
Και το μισοπεθαμένο γεράνι στο παράθυρο, 

Στη Βαρσοβία περπατούσε συνεχώς μια γυναίκα 
Ανάμεσα στα ερείπια 

Παρ’ όλο που η παράσταση ήταν έκτακτη, 
Και η πάπια στην εντέλεια ψημένη. 
Στους σταθμούς που ακολούθησαν 

Με κορινθιακούς κίονες και σφυροδρέπανα 
Γυναίκες πουλούσαν μπουκέτα με αγριολούλουδα 
Σ’ όλο το μήκος της σιδηροδρομικής γραμμής 

Ή μούρα μεζεμένα από το δάσος 
Που τα κουβαλούσαν χαράματα σε πλαστικούς κουβάδες. 
Ένα καλοκαίρι περνούσε από τα παράθυρα του τραίνου 

Όπως που βλέπεις σε παλιές ταινίες. 
 

Έτσι έφτασε το τραίνο στο Βερολίνο 
Και ήταν μάταιο να ψάχνω τα χαμένα. 
Μάζεψα αυτά που βρήκα στο ταξίδι, 

Πρόσθεσα και αφαίρεσα 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            53        

 
 

  

I added, I subtracted,  
And stepped out to see the new city 
The steel and glass of the mighty. 

Es machte mir spass…** 
* Dolls used in religious puppet shows:  Jewish Museum 

of Vilnius. 
** I enjoyed it… 

 

Και βγήκα να δω την καινούρια πόλη 
Το γυαλί και το μέταλλο των κραταιών. 

Es machte mir spass…** 
 

* Κούκλες που χρησιμοποιούνταν σε θρησκευτικά 
κουκλοθέατρα: Εβραϊκό Μουσείο στη Βίλνιους. 

** Το διασκέδασα 
 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            54        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

TO MY FRIENDS IN THE NORTH 

for Mehmet Yiasin 

 

ΓΙΑ ΤΟΥΣ ΦΙΛΟΥΣ ΣΤΟ ΒΟΡΡΑ 

στον Μεχμέτ Γιασίν 
 
 
 

Because I talk of roses, 
of the diffusion of light, 

of the impossibility of love, of our transitory lives 
do not think, friends in the north that what happened in 

1974 
does not spread like a stain on my life every day. 

 
The moon rising like a water melon slice from the sea 

and my dead mother on our veranda on Famagusta beach 
calling us to get out of the water I saw a painting she had 
done, the other dαy, on a wall in a taverna in the Karpass 
a taverna consisting of stolen chairs, stolen tablecloths, 

stolen doors, 
stolen doorhandles. 

-It's my mother's, I said to the man, here is her name. 
-But it's mine now said the man, who came from where the 

sun rises. (this is how his wife described him). -Its mine 
now he said, ganimend*, This is how they call it in Turkish. 

 
Istanbul bookfair, Oct. 2005 *ganimend: war booty 

 
 
 

Επειδή μιλώ για τριαντάφυλλα, για τη διάχυση του φωτός, 
την ανημποριά της αγάπης, και την παροδική ζωή μας, μη 
νομίζετε, φίλοι από τον βορρά, ότι αυτό που συνέβηκε το 

74 
δεν απλώνει σαν κηλίδα στη ζωή μου, 

κάθε μέρα. 
 

Το φεγγάρι ξεπροβάλλει σα μια φέτα καρπουζιού από τη 
Θάλασσα 

και η πεθαμένη μητέρα μου στη βεράντα του σπιτιού μας 
στην παραλία της Αμμοχώστου να μας φωνάζει να βγούμε 

από το νερό. Είδα έναν πίνακα που ζωγράφισε τις 
προάλλες 

στον τοίχο μιας ταβέρνας στο Καρπάσι. 
Μιας ταβέρνας που την αποτελούσαν κλεμμένες καρέκλες, 

κλεμμένα τραπεζομάντηλα, 
κλεμμένες πόρτες, κλεμμένα χερούλια. 

-Είναι της μάνας μου, είπα στον ταβερνάρη, εδώ είναι 
γραμμένο το όνομα της. -Τώρα όμως είναι δικό μου, είπε 
o άντρας που ήρθε από το μέρος που ανατέλλει o ήλιος, 
(έτσι μου τον περιέγραψε η γυναίκα του). -Είναι δικό μου 

τώρα, είπε, ganimend,* 
έτσι το λένε στα τουρκικά 

 
Έκθεση βιβλίου στην Κωνσταντινούπολη, Οκτ. 2005 

ganimend: λάφυρο πολέμου 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            55        

 
 

  

[Index] 

Mavris Christos (1954 ) 
 

Mavris Christos was born in the village of Limnati in 1954. He studied Journalism and 
Humanities. He works as a journalist, and as a inurnalism teacher at a college in Nicosia. He 
has published poetry and studies on Literature. He received the Cyprus State Prize for Young 
Poets in 1978, as well as the Second State Prize for Poetry. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στο χωριό Λιμνάτι της επαρχίας Λεμεσού το 1954. Σπύδασε 
Δημοσιογραφία και Ανθρωπιστικές Σπουδές. Εργάζεται ως δημοσιογράφος και διδάσκει 
Δημοσιογραφία σε Κολλέγιο στη Λευκωσία. Έχει εκδόσει ποίηση και λογοτεχνικές μελέτες. 
Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης για Νέους Λογοτέχνες το 1978 και με δεύτερο 
Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης. 

 
[Index] [Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            56        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Wűrzburg 

 

Βυρτσμπουργκ 
 

The town a mermaid of the sea 
submerged in a blue eternity 

holding in her right hand a clock 
and in her left a bitten apple. 

at night, in the absolute silence, 
you can listen, if you wideh, 

to the fluttering of angels that 
fly low above your head. 

if you wish, you can also walk 
-like the Nazarene- 

on the living waves of the Main 
that will carry you into the heart 

of the great warm dream. 
The bed of this river 

a thick vein it courses along 
the arched brow of the town. 

if you place your hand 
in its icy waters 

you will hear her pulse 
you will feel her song. 

 
Certainly it must have been here 

that weary Jusus took refuge to rest 
after His maryred death 

This is proclaimed by the bells 
that endlessly ring 

at her one hundred churches. 
July 25 – November 1997 

 
 

 
Η πόλη γοργόνα θαλασσιά βρίσκεται 
βουτηγμένη στη γαλάζια αιωνιότητα 
έχοντας στο δεξί της χέρι ένα ρολόι 
και στο άλλο ένα δαγκωμένο μήλο. 
Το βράδυ, αν το θελήσεις, μπορείς 
ν’ ακούσεις μέσα στην απόλυτη σιγή 
τα φτερουγίσματα των αγγέλων που 

χαμηλοπετούν πάνω από το κεφάλι σου. 
Ακόμη μπορείς να βαδίσεις 

όπως ο Ναζωραίος – 
πάνω στα ζωντανά κύμματα του Μαιν 
για να σε ταξιδέψουν στην καρδιά 

του μεγάλου ζεστού ονείρου. 
Η κοίτη αυτού του ποταμού 

σαν φλέβα πλατιά διέρχεται δίπλα 
από το καμαρόφρυδο της πόλης. 

Αν αγγίξεις το χέρι σου 
μέσα στα παγωμένα νερά 
θα ακούσεις το σφυγμό της, 
θα νοιώσεις το τραγούδι της. 

 
Ο ταλαιπωρημένος Χριστός σίγουρα 

εδώ κατέφυγε για ν’ αναπαυθεί 
ύστερα από το μαρτυρικό θάνατο Του. 

Το αναγγέλουν οι καμπάνες 
που ηχολογούνε ακατάπαυστα 
από τις 100 εκκλησίες της. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            57        

 
 

  

[Index] 

Moleskis Giorgos (1946) 
 
      Was born in the village of Lysi in 1946. He studied Russian Language and Literature 
in Moscow, and holds a Ph.D. He worked as Senior Cultural Officer at the Cultural Services 
of the Cyprus Ministry of Education and Culture. He has published poetry, prose, studies and 
monographs. He has translated Russian Poetry into Greek. He received the Cyprus State Prize 
for Poetry in 1984, and many other distinctions. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

 Γεννήθηκε στη Λύση το 1946. Σπούδασε Ρωσική Γλώσσα και Φιλολογία στη Μόσχα 
και είναι κάτοχος διδακτορικού. Εργάστηκε ως ανώτερος Πολιτιστικός Λειτουργός στις 
Πολιτιστικές Υπηρεσίες του Υπουργού Παιδείας και Πολιτισμού. Δημοσίευσε πολλές 
ποιητικές συλλογές, πρόζα, μελέτες και μονογραφίες. Έχει επίσης μεταφράσει Ρώσικη 
ποίηση στα ελληνικά. Τιμήθηκε με Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης και με πολλές αλλες 
διακρίσεις. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            58        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

LIFE 

 

ΖΩΗ 

 
I love life. I hate death and every killing. 
I rejoice in this gift that was given to me 

as though mad. And whether life is madness 
or whether wisdom - mad, or wise – 

I rejoice in this existence without bounds. 
I gather my blood drop by drop 

from my bloody journey 
and I return it to the veins again 

and I close the wounds with balm 
and I heal the soul with love 
and with oblivion and hope. 

Fires burn me, 
slanders judge me, 

conspiracies persecute me, 
poverty and slavery 

reap me. 
So that I redeem my life: 

I pay for life with life 
and like a madman opening the palms, 

I gather my blood from the earth 
and I return it, like water to the thirsty roots, 

throwing it back into my veins. 
 

Translated by: Lisa Socrates 

 
 

 
Τη ζωή την αγαπώ.  Το θάνατο μισώ και κάθε φόνο. 

αίρομαι για το δώρο τούτο που μου δόθηκε 
καθώς τρελός.  Κι αν η ζωή είναι τρέλα 

είτε σοφία – τρελός, είτε σοφός –  
χαίρομαι με δίχως σύνορα τούτο το είναι. 

 
Το αίμα μου στάλα στάλα το μαζεύω 
από τον πολυαίμακτο μου δρόμο 
και ξανά στις φλέβες το γυρίζω 

και κλείνω τις πληγές με βάλσαμο 
και με αγάπη την ψυχή γιατρεύω 

και μα λησμονιά κι ελπίδα. 
 

Φωτιές με καίνε, 
συκοφαντίες με δικάζουν, 

συνωμοσίες με κατατρέχουν,  
η φτώχεια με θερίζει 

κι η σκλαβιά. 
 

Ωστόσο εξαγοράζω τη ζωή μου: 
Με ζωή για τη ζωή πληρώνω 

και σαν τρελός ανοίγοντας τις χούφτες, 
το αίμα μου μαζεύω από τη γη 

και το γυρίζω σαν νερό στις διψασμένες ρίζες, 
πίσω το ρίχνω μες τις φλέβες μου. 

 
. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ]



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            59        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

UNFADING ROSES 

 

 

ΡΟΔΑ ΑΜΑΡΑΝΤΑ 

 

 
Only the spirit gives birth to unfailing roses 

and only art creates perfection. 
With all the pluses and minuses of history and of the soul 
of man the verses of Homer, the statues of Michelangelo 

and the grey of Theotokopoulos continually expand. 
 

Only things useless in the material world 
can stay the same and change 

according to their position and according to time, 
with the agony of the soul and the projection of the mind, 

accepting only addition and multiplication. 
 

Often, all else falls into the minus 
and into division, becoming stages of transition for the 

orchestration of the crime. 
 

If there is hope that, at the end, something will last, that is 
the soul and the otherwise useless things that are her 

bread, her water, and her honey. 

 
Μόνο το πνεύμα μπορεί να γεννήσει ρόδα αμάραντα και η 

τέχνη να πλάσει το τελειωμένο. Με όλα τα συν και τα 
πλην της ιστορίας και της ψυχής του ανθρώπου 

διευρύνονται ολοένα οι στίχοι του Ομήρου, τα μάρμαρα 
του Μιχαήλ Αγγέλου και το γκρίζο του Θεοτοκόπουλου. 

 
Μόνο πράγματα ανώφελα από τη μεριά του υλικού 

κόσμου μπορούν να παραμένουν τα ίδια και να αλλάζουν 
ανάλογα με τη Θέση που βρίσκεσαι και το χρόνο, την 
αγωνία της ψυχής και την προέκταση του μυαλού και 
μονάχα πρόσθεση και πολλαπλασιασμό επιδέχονται. 

 
'Ολα τα άλλα ξεπέφτουνε συχνά στο πλην και στη 

διαίρεση, γίνονται στάδια μεταβατικά για την κατασκευή 
του εγκλήματος. 

 
Αν υπάρχει ελπίδα κάτι να σωθεί στο τέλος 

είναι η ψυχή κι αυτά τα ανώφελα κατά τα άλλα πράγματα 
που είναι το ψωμί της, το νερό της και το μέλι της. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            60        

 
 

  

[Index] 

Montis Costas (1914 – 2004) 

 
 

Costas Montis was born on February 18, 1914 in Famagusta, and died on March 1, 
2004 in his house in Nicosia, surrounded by his family. He has received numerous honors and 
awards throughout his life, and his books have been translated into several languages. Costas 
Montis has received honorary doctorates from both the University of Cyprus and the 
University of Athens. He has been nominated for the Nobel Prize, and in 2000 he was 
declared Corresponding Member of the Academy of Athens, the highest honor conferred 
upon intellectual creators living outside Greece. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 

 
 

Ο Κώστας Μόντης γεννήθηκε στην Αμμόχωστο το 1914 και πέθανε στη Λευκωσία το 
2004. Σπούδασε νομικά και εργάστηκε ως δημοσιογράφος, δάσκαλος στη Δημοτική 
Εκπαίδευση και Διευθυντής Τουρισμού. Έγραψε και εξέδωσε πληθώρα ποιητικών συλλογών, 
πεζογραφήματα, θεατρικά κ.α. Τιμήθηκε με Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης, με το Βραβείο 
Συνολικής Προσφοράς και με αλλες διακρίσεις. Υπήρξε αντεπιστέλλων μέλλοςτης 
Ακαδημίας Αθηνών. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            61        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE UNKNOWN SOLDIER 

 

 

ΑΓΝΩΣΤΟΣ ΣΤΡΑΤΙΩΤΗΣ 

 
Why must always that robust, 
why always that brave fighter 
depict the Unknown Soldier? 

There also are the others, 
the more timid ones, 

the weaker ones,with wrinkled face 
and a bitter thought on the eyelid, 

with many hesitations behind the trigger. 
Will they not do, 

will they not make statues? 
 

Translation by Amaranth Sitas 
 
 

 
MOZART AND THE CRUEL FATE 

In everything she interfered, 
on everything her hand she laid, only his genius 

she could not hinder, 
since it had come from elsewhere, outside her jurisdiction, 

and she had to let it be. 
FOR "MARS" BY DIEGO VELAZQUEZ AT THE PRADO 
Having cast down the shield, he rests. His mind races 

back with remorse to the horrors assigned to him. 
 
 
 
 

TO NIKOS KAZANTZAKIS 
FOR "THE LAST TEMPTATION" 
If you were looking for the "man" 

there was once a child called Jesus 
who used to play with marbles in His neighborhood, if you 

              
 

Γιατί πάντα αυτός ο ρωμαλέος, 
Γιατί πάντα αυτός ο γενναίος πολεμιστής 

ν ΄αντιπροσωπεύει τον Άγνωστο Στρατιώτη; 
Υπάρχουν κι άλλοι πιο δειλοί, πιο αδύνατοι, 

Με πιο ρυτιδωμένα μέτωπα, 
Με μια πικρή σκέψη στο βλέφαρο, με πολλούς 

υπολογισμούς πίσω απ΄ τη σκανδάλη. 
Δε μας κάνουν αυτοί, 

Δε γίνουνται αγάλματα αυτοί; 
 

« Ποίηση του Κώστα Μόντη»1962 
 
 
 
 

O ΜΟΖΑΡΤ K' H ΚΑΚΗ ΜΟΙΡΑ 
Σ' όλα επενέβηκε, 

σ' όλα έβανε το χεράκι της, μονάχα στη μεγαλοφυΐα του 
δεν μπόρεσε να επέμβη, απ' αλλού ήταν αυτή, 

δεν ήταν της δικαιοδοσίας της, και την άφησε να περάση. 
ΓΙΑ TON «ΑΡΗ» TOY DIEGO VELAZQUEZ ΣΤΟ PRADO 
Πέταξε χάμω την ασπίδα και ξεκουράζεται. H σκέψη του 

τρέχει με τύψεις 
σ' όλα εκείνα τα φοβερά που του ανέθεσαν. 

 
 
 

ΠΡΟΣ ΝΙΚΟ KAZANTZAKH 
ΓΙΑ TON «ΤΕΛΕΥΤΑΙΟ ΠΕΙΡΑΣΜΟ» 
Αν έΨαχνες για τον «άνθρωπο» 

υπήρχε ένας μικρός Ιησούς πούπαιζε σβώλους στη 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            62        

 
 

  

were looking for the "man" there was once a child called 
Jesus who used to tug at His Mother's dress, who used to 

wipe his nose on His sleeve. 
But later, I do not know how much of that "man" remained. 

VERSES FROM JEAN ANOUILLE 
All is a simple matter of casting, nothing more. 

FROM CHARLES DICKENS 
A smile never goes to waste nor do some tears. 

 
 

 

γειτονιά Του, αν έψαχνες για τον «άνθρωπο» υπήρχε 
ένας μικρός Ιησούς 

που τραβούσε τη Μητέρα Του πα' το ρούχο, που σκούπιζε 
τη μύτη με το μανίκι Του. 

Αργότερα δεν ξέρω πόσος «άνθρωπος» απέμεινε. 
ΣΤΙΧΟΙ ΑΠΟ TON JEAN ANOUILLE 

Είν' όλα ζήτημα απλής διανομής ρόλων, τίποτ' άλλο. 
ΑΠΟ TON CHARLES DICKENS 

'Οπως ένα χαμόγελο δεν πάει ποτέ χαμένο έτσι και 
μερικά δάκρυα. 

 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            63        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Nicolaou Theodosis (1930 – 2004) 
 
 

Theodosis Nicolaou was born in Paphos in 1930, and died in Larnaca in 2004. He 
studied Philology at the University of Athens, and Pedagogic in London. He worked in 
Secondary Education. He published poetry, prose, essays and studies. He received the State 
Prize for Poetry in 1980. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Πάφο το 1930 και πέθανε στη Λάρνακα το 2004. Σπούδασε 
Φιλολογία στο Πανεπιστημίο Αθηνών και παιδαγωγικά στο Λονδίνο. Εργάστηκε στη Μέση 
Εκπαίδευση και αφυπηρέτησε ως Διευθυντής Σχολείου. Δημοσίευσε ποίηση, πεζά, δοκίμια 
και μελέτες. Τιμήθηκε με  το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης.   
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            64        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

SIGHTSEEING 

 

Περιηγήσεις 

 
"This building is not a stable, it is a church."  

"We can snap a photo then?"  
Memory clothed in color.  

Historical events distorted 
Because the guide must always be chattering  
And because certainty must not abandon him  

At the inn there at the corner  
Richard the Lionheart is sitting 

(But where is the forlorn princess of Navarra?)  
Discussing with Ptolemy Lagus  

The much-disputed question of the Filioque. 
There I dreamt of your limbs 

Of the irrepressible tide of your body.  
My embraces deepening the riverbeds 

And my hands collecting the constellations.  
But the mountain with the trees at night  

Weighs heavy like a boulder upon the chest –  
Unable to take a breath. 

 
I am neither a bird nor a kite. 

I am a simple man, albeit only half 
Who prefers the warmth of his lowly home in winter  

And the coolness of light blue bed sheets in summer. 
 

Our eyes do not reflect the shooting stars 
Only the flicker of the light of the candle and of the lamp  

We live at the edge of life in a low voice  
Whispering 

All but mutely. 
 

"La Torre di Pisa, La Tour Eiffel 
Toledo in an apotheosis of light, Toledo in the storm.  

Here Dante Alighieri was born... 

 
«Δεν είναι στάβλος αυτό το κτίσμα, είναι εκκλησία». 

«’Ωστε μπορούμε να πάρουμε μια φωτογραφία;» 
Η μνήμη ντυμένη με χρώμα. 

Τα ιστορικά γεγονότα διαστρεβλώνονται 
Γιατί ο οδηγός πρέπει πάντα να μιλά 

Και η σιγουριά να μην τον εγκαταλείπει 
Στο πανδοχείο εκεί στην άκρη 

Κάθεται ο Ριχάρδος ο Λεοντόκαρδος 
(Πού είναι η λυπημένη πριγκιποπούλα της Ναβάρρας;)  

και συζητά με τον Πτολεμαίο τον Λάγου 
το επίμαχο θέμα του filioque. 

 
Εκεί ονειρεύτηκα τα μέλη σου 

Την ακατάσχετη παλίρροια του κορμιού σου. 
Οι αγκάλες μου να βαθαίνουν τις κοίτες 
Και τα χέρια μου να μαζεύουν αστέρια. 
Όμως το βουνό με τα δέντρα τη νύχτα 

Βαραίνει σαν πέτρα επάνω στα στήθη σου – 
Δεν μπορείς ν’ αναπνεύσεις. 

 
Δεν είναι ούτε πουλί, ούτε χαρταετός. 

Είμαι ένας άνθρωπος κοινός, κι αυτός μισός 
Που προτιμά το χειμώνα τη θαλπωρή στην καλύβα του 
Και το καλοκαίρι τη δροσιά μέσα σε γαλάζια σεντόνια. 

 
Τα μάτια μας δεν αντικατροπτρίζουν του διάττοντες 
Μονάχα η αναλαμπή από το φως του κεριού και της 

λάμπας 
Ζούμε στο κράσπεδο της ζωής με χαμηλή φωνή 

Ψιθυριστά 
Σχεδόν βουβά. 

 
«Ο πύργος της Πίζας, ο πύργος του ‘Αιφελ 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            65        

 
 

  

Have you read the name of the eternal city backwards?"* 
We are sailing the oceans, crossing to terra firma 

We are searching only for a smoke signal.  
Simple viewers in the amphitheatre 

At most an insignificant role so life will roll past 
At most a cheap costume so life will have some color.  

And the ropes tauten around our shoulders. 
* Roma - Amor 

 
Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

το Τολέδο στην αποθέωση του φωτός, το Τολέδο με 
καταιγίδα. 

Εδώ γεννήθηκε ο Ντάντε... 
Έχετε διαβάσει το όνομα της αιώνιας πόλεως 

παλινδρομικώς;» 
 

Πλέουμε τον ωκεανό, διαπερνούμε τη στεριά. 
Δεν γυρεύουμε παρά μια σπιθαμή καπνό. 

Απλοί θεατές στο αμφιθέατρο 
Το πιο πολύ ένας ασήμαντος ρόλος για να κυλήσει η ζωή 
Το πιο πολύ μια φτηνή αμφίεση για να πάρει χρώμα η 

ζωή. 
Στις ωμοπλάτες μας τεντώνονται οι σπάγκοι. 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            66        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Orphanides Nikos (1949) 
 

Born in Kythrea in 1949. He studied Greek Literature in the Athens University.He has 
published collections of poetry, as well as philological and critical studies.He received the 
Cyprus State Prize. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Κυθρέα το 1949.Σπούδασε Ελληνική Φιλολογία στην Αθήνα. 
Ποιητής και δοκιμιογράφος. Τιμήθηκε με το κρατικό Βραβείο Δοκιμίου και με Κρατικό 
Έπαινο για την Ποίηση. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            67        

 
 

  

 
  [Index] 
 

 

Lefkosia, Spring 1980 AD 

 

Λευκωσία άνοιξη 1980μ.Χ. 

Once more I feel you descending 
Aflaming sun 

In the heavy sea of night 
we sit at the low stone wall 
of a desolate neighborhood 

carnation behind the ear 
let’s have a coffee 

lazily the city stretches 
the homes of the Green line 

await their forgotten residents 
who keep sending messages of their coming 

but never arrive 
Μarch 16, 1980 

 
Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

    Πάλι σε νιώθω που κατεβαίνεις 
 ήλιος πυρφόρος 

στην τρικυμία της νύχτας 
καθόμαστε στο πεζούλι 
Της έρημης γειτονιάς 
γαρύφαλλο στ΄αυτί 

έλα να πιούμε ένα καφεδάκι  
η πόλη τεντώνεται νωχελικά 

τα σπίτια της πράσινης γραμμής 
περιμένουν τους ξεχασμένους ενοίκους 

π΄όλο μηνάν πως θα΄ρθουν 
κι όμως δεν έρχονται ποτέ. 
Εντός των τειχών, 1983 

 
 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ]



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            68        

 
 

  

 [Index] 
 
 
 Pashiardis Michalis (1941) 
 

Michalis Pashiardis was born in the village of Tseri in 1941. From 1964 and until his 
retirement, he worked in Cultural Programmes at the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation. He is 
a regular contributor to dailies and literary magazines. He has published numerous collections 
of poetry, written plays and studies. He has received the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry. 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στο Τσέρι, το 1941. Από το 1964 μέχρι την αφυπηρέτησή του εργάστηκε 
στα πολιτιστικά προγράμματα του Ραδιοφωνικού Ιδρύματος Κύπρου.Είναι τακτικός 
συνεργάτης εφημερίδων και περιοδικών.Έγραψε και εξέδωσε πολλές ποιητικές 
συλλογές,θεατρικά και μελέτες.Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατκό Βραβείο Ποίησης. 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            69        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

FUNERAL OF A FIGHTER 

 

 

ΚΗΔΕΙΑ ΑΓΩΝΙΣΤΗ 

Leaden sky, heavy. 
Heavy the hands lifting 
your coffin; you of the 

lightest - like the vision — 
among us. 

The street for the cemetery 
passes by the landscape of Springtime. 

At half-mast the daisies shed their petals 
and up above, the swallows 

are the small crosses of our suffering. 
"O my sweet spring... " Afterwards it rained hard 

Translated by: John Vickers 
 

 
Μολυβένιος ουρανός, βαρύς. 

Βαριά τα χέρια, που σηκώνουνε το  φέρετρο σου εσέ του  
πιο ελαφρού —σαν τ’ όραμα— 

ανάμεσό  μας. 
 

Ο δρόμος για το κοιμητήρι περνά απ' το τοπίο της 'Άνοιξης.  
Μεσίστιες φολλοροούν οι μαργαρίτες  

κι απανωθε τα χελιδόνια είναι οι μικροί σταυροί του 
πάθους μας. 

Ω γλυκύ μου έαρ.... 
Ύστερα έβρεχε δυνατά  

για όσα δάκρυα δε χύσαμε. 
 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            70        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Papaonisiforou Myrianthy (1941) 
 

Myrianthi Papaonisiforou was born and lives in Paphos. She studied Social Sciences 
in Athens, and completed her post-graduate studies in London. She has worked in the 
Department of Social Services. She has published several collections of poetry, and received 
the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry among other awards and distinctions. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Πάφο.Σπούδασε Κοινωνικές Επιστήμες στην Αθήνα και έκανε 
μεταπτυχιακές σπουδές στο Λονδίνο. Εργάστηκε στο τμήμα Κοινωνικών Υπηρεσιών.Έγραψε 
και δημοσίευσε πολλές ποιητικές συλλογές.Τιμήθηκε με  το κρατικό Βραβείο ποίησης. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            71        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Malta 

 

 

Μάλτα 

 
 

I shall keep you then  
an imprint of an unadorned identity 

in the collection of the world 
infertile land 

with balconies of silence 
timeless land 

vanquished by the past 
which imposes an orgy of art 

on my enery movement 
an insupportable stone 

 
I shall keep you then 

an affirmation to the call of the world arid land 
of the rock and of the white stone sorceress land 

how did you keep Odysseus from me 
hundreds of years in a cave? 

 
 

Translated by:  Irena Ioannides 

 
Θα σε κρατήσω λοιπόν 

ένα αποτύπωμα λιτής ταυτότητας 
στη συλλογή του κόσμου 

άγονη χώρα 
με τα μπαλκόνια της σιωπής 

άχρονη χώρα 
κατακτημένη από το χτες 

που επιβάλλεται όργιο τέχνης 
στην κάθε μου κίνηση 

ασήκωτη πέτρα 
 

Θα σε κρατήσω λοιπόν 
κατάφαση στο κάλεσμα του κόσμου 

άνυδρη χώρα 
του βράχου και της άσπρης πέτρας 

μάγισσα χώρα 
πώς μου εκράτησες τον Οδυσσέα 
σε μια σπηλιά τόσους αιώνες; 

 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            72        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
 
Andreas Pastellas (1932) 
 

Andreas Pastellas was born in Kato Paphos in 1932. He studied Philology in Athens, 
and completed his post-graduate studies in Pedagogic and School Administration. He worked 
in Secondary Education as teacher, Headmaster and Supervisor of Philology Courses. He is 
the President of the Cyprus Linguistic Association. He has published collections of poetry, as 
well as philological and critical studies. He received the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στην Κάτω Πάφο το 1932.Σπούδασε Ελληνική Φιλολογία στην Αθήνα. 
Έκανε μεταπτυχιακές σπουδές στα Παιδαγωγικά και στη Διεύθυνση Σχολείου. Εργάστηκε  
στη Μέση Εκπαίδευση, ως Καθηγητής, Διευθυντής και Επιθεωρητής  των Φιλολογικών 
Μαθημάτων. Είναι ο Πρόεδρος του Κυπριακού Γλωσσολογικού Συνδέσμου Κύπρου. 
Δημοσίευσε συλλογές Ποιημάτων όπως επίσης και φιλολογικές και κριτικές 
μελέτες.Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης. 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            73        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Empty desks 

 

 

Άδεια θρανία 

 
 

I took attendance and you were missing, 
practicing orthography on walls. 

I took attendance and you were missing, 
and you were at the roadblocks. 

I took attendance 
and on your small knees 
in prison you scribbled 
the History of mankind. 

And on the attendance list I wrote: all present! 
and next to each of your names the grade: excellent! 

 
Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 
 
  

 
Διάβασα τον κατάλογο κι εσείς λείπατε, 

γράφατε την ορθογραφία σας στους τοίχους. 
Διάβασα τον κατάλογο 

και εσείς βρισκόσαστε στα οδοφράγματα. 
Διάβασα τον κατάλογο 

και σεις γράφατε στις φυλακές 
στα μικρά σας γόνατα 

την Ιστορία του Ανθρώπου. 
Κι έγραψα στον κατάλογο:όλοι παρόντες! 
και πλάι το βαθμό του καθενός σας:άριστα! 

Χώρος διασποράς, 1970 
 
 
 

 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            74        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

ALL IS THE FLOW OF THE WIND OR 

THE PRINCE OF HANNOVER 

 

 

TA ΠΑΝΤΑ ΡΟΗ ΑΝΕΜΟΥ 

'H O ΑΡΧΟΝΤΑΣ TOY ANNOBEPOY 

 
 

The icy wind enfolds the horse 
wafting around it like an enormous cape little lights burn at 

the station tired immigrants place calls to distant 
homelands. Atop his bronze horse the prince of Hannover 

waves to his people beloved as he once was now 
forgotten atop his horse tired upon his horse alone among 
the hurried travelers that pour out, herds from the railway 
station herds the workers that leave the station herds the 

days that pass by his tired horse. 
 

A stranger is History a stranger in History 
a stranger among the people of the trains 

a stranger among the hurrying people of the square a 
stranger among their daily cares beloved as he once was 

now forgotten upon his tired horse. 
 

Love is a vapor that rises like smoke on this street, 
where all is an endless gust of wind and futility of futilities 

all that is of man. 
Berlin, November 1984 

 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 
 

 
Τυλίγει τ' άλογο o παγωμένος αγέρας 

σαν πελώριος μανδύας ανεμίζει γύρω του φωτισμένα 
λαμπιόνια ανάβουν στο σταθμό κουρασμένοι μετανάστες 
τηλεφωνούν στις μακρυνές πατρίδες τους. Ανεβασμένος 

στο μπρούντζινό του άλογο o άρχοντας του  
 

Αννόβερου χαιρετά το λαό του 
αγαπημένος κάποτε από το λαό του ξεχασμένος πάνω στο 
άλογό του κουρασμένος πάνω στο άλογό του μόνος μέσα 
στους βιαστικούς ταξιδιώτες που χύνονται κοπάδια από 

το σιδηροδρομικό σταθμό 
κοπάδια οι εργάτες που βγαίνουν από το σταθμό κοπάδια 
οι μέρες που περνούν πλάι στο κουρασμένο του άλογο. 

 
Ξένη η Ιστορία ξένος μέσα στην Ιστορία 

ξένος μέσα στους ανθρώπους των τραίνων ξένος μέσα 
στους βιαστικούς της πλατείας ξένος μέσα στις φροντίδες 
κάποτε αγαπημένος από το λαό του ξεχασμένος πάνω στο 

κουρασμένο του άλογο. 
 

Αχνός η αγάπη περνά σαν καπνός 
σ' αυτό τον δρόμο, 

όπου τα πάντα ροή ατέρμονη ανέμου 
και ματαιότης ματαιοτήτων τα ανθρώπινα. 

Βερολίνο, Νοέμβριος 1984 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            75        

 
 

  

[Index] 
  
Patapiou Nasa (1953) 
 

Nasa Patapiou was born in Rizokarpaso. She studied Drama, Byzantine and Modern 
Greek Literature in Thessalonica, as well as History and Archaeology in Athens. She worked 
as a researcher/historian, and served as Cultural Attache of the Cyprus Embassy in Athens, 
and as Director of the House of Cyprus. She received the State Prize for Poetry in 1988. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στο Ριζοκάρπασο. Σπούδασε θέατρο, Βυζαντινή και Σύγχρονη Ελληνική 
Λογοτεχνία στη Θεσσαλονίκη και Ιστορία και Αρχαιολογία στην Αθήνα.Εργάστηκε ως 
ερευνήτρια/ιστορικός και υπηρέτησε ως Πολιτιστικός Λειτουργός της Κυπριακής Πρεσβείας 
στην Ελλάδα και Διευθύντρια τουΣπιτιού της Κύπρου.Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο 
Ποίησης.  

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            76        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

LINEAGE 

 

ΚΑΤΑΓΩΓΗ 
 

I spring 
From the Peninsula 

Of Carpasia's mountains 
And flow out into my body 

Inside me 
Fountains and stagnant waters 

Idols in water 
Shadows in red blood 
Reflections in morning 
And others in evening 
May the Angel come 

With his sword 
May he stab 
My right side 

May the blood gush 
May it flood the water 

May the frothing waves 
Envelop me 

May your shape 
Come alight 

May"-you limits be etched 
As they used to be 

And from my belongings 
May only my voice remain 

I am the thinking plant 
In the precipices 

Of the island of Cyprus 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 
Πηγάζω 

Από της Χερσονήσου 
Καρπασίας τα όρη 

Κι εκβάλλω στο σώμα μου 
Μέσα μου οι πίδακες 

Και τα λιμνάζοντα ύδατα 
Είδωλα μέσα στο νερό 
Σκιές στο κόκκινο αίμα 
Ανταύγειες το πρωί 
Κι άλλες το βράδυ 
Να ’ρθει ο Άγγελος 
Με τη ρομφαία 
Και να χαράξει 

Τη δεξιά μου την πλευρά 
Να φύγει το αίμα 

Να πλημμυρίσει το νερό 
Αφρώδη κύματα 

Να με περιτυλίξουν 
Φως να φανεί 
Το σχήμα σου 

Τα οριά σου να χαρακτούν 
Σαν πρώτα  

Κι απ’ τα υπάρχοντα μου 
Να μένει μόνον η φωνή 
Είμαι το νοήμον φυτό  

Στα απόκρημνα 
Της νήσου Κύπρου 

Συλλογή Το Φωνήεν σώμα 
 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            77        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

LOVER'S CONJURE 

 

 

Η ΘΑΥΜΑΤΟΠΟΙΟΣ ΤΟΥ 'ΕΡΩΤΑ 

 
 

I have a magic orchard 
That is enclosed all round Many learn for it And pace 

outside 
But no-one dares step inside Its exotic plants Alarm them 
Its heady scents Make them faint They lack imagination 

And besides 
They have no fantasies of love 

 
I have a magic orchard 

That is enclosed all round Or rather a school 
Where you can be taught and learn If you are brave and 

ready Step inside my orchard 
Let me take you around and show you How history is born 

Out of nothing 
And from my delicate stem You will blossom, like it or not 

 
Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 

' 
Εχω ένα περιβόλι μαγικό Περιφραγμένο Το ορέγονται 

πολλοί Και τριγυρνούν απ΄έξω Μα δεν τολμούν να μπουν 
'Εχει εξωτικά φυτά Και τους τρομάζουν Εκπέμπει ευωδιές, 
μεθυστικές Τους προκαλεί λιποθυμία Άλλωστε στερούνται 

φαντασίας Και επιπλέον 
Δεν φαντασιώνονται στον έρωτα 

 
'Εχω ένα περιβόλι μαγικό Περιφραγμένο 'Η μάλλον μια 
σχολή Να διδαχθείς να μάθεις Αν είσαι έτοιμος γενναίος 
'Ελα στο περιβόλι αυτό Για να σε ξεναγήσω Πως απ' το 

τίποτα Γεννιέται η ιστορία 
Και από τον λεπτεπίλεπτό μου μίσχο θέλεις δεν θες θα 

ανθοφορήσεις 
 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            78        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Peonidou Elli (1940) 
 

Elli Peonidou was born in Vassa Kilaniou, Limassol, and studied Home Economics in 
Athens. She works as a journalist and as a professional writer. She has written numerous 
works of poetry, prose, theatre and children's literature. She has received the State Prize for 
Children's Literature, and many other local and international awards and distinctions. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 

 
Γεννήθηκε στη Βάσα Κοιλανίου και σπούδασε Οικιακή Οικονομία στην Αθήνα. 

Εργάζεται ως δημοσιογράφος. Έγραψε πληθώρα βιβλίων ποίησης,πεζογραφίας,θεατρικά και 
παιδικά.Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο για την Παιδική Λογοτεχνία. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            79        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

Breakfast on the balcony 

 

 

ΠΡΟΓΕΥΜΑ ΣΤΟ ΜΠΑΛΚΟΝΙ 

 
 

The young couple comes to the balcony 
November's end and time two minutes after eight. 

Morning pours onto 
Ninth Street roaring. 

Dancing, she brings the tray with coffee bread, 
honey and apples, and he, a rose in a flower-vase. 

 
They sit. Leans her head to his knees 

and he caresses her hair. 
Drink, laugh, look at each other. 

Fifteen minutes after eight they take 
the cups and the rose away. 

Go inside and close up. 
Wet snow bedecks the window sill. 

 
And behind the windowpane the poet 

nails the moment like a butterfly. 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 
 

 
Το ζευγαράκι βγήκε στο μπαλκόνι 

τέλος Νοέμβρη ώρα οκτώ και δυο λεπτά. 
Το πρωινό χιμάει βουίζοντας στην Ένατη Λεωφόρο. 

 
Χορεύοντας φέρνει το δίσκο εκείνη με καφέ 

ψωμί, μέλι και μήλα 
κι εκείνος ένα ρόδο στο ανθογυάλι. 

 
Κάθονται.  Γέρνει στα γόνατα του το κεφάλι 

και της χαϊδεύει τα μαλλιά. 
Πίνουν, γελούν, κοιτάζονται. 
Οκτώ και τέταρτο σηκώνουν 
φλιτζάνια και τριαντάφυλλο. 

Μπαίνουν και κλείνουν.  Το χιονόνερο 
στολίζει το πρεβάζι. 

 
Κι ο ποιητής πίσω απ’ το τζάμι 

καρφώνει τη στιγμή σαν πεταλούδα.. 
 

Νέα Υόρκη, Νοέμβρης 1992 
Λεμεσός, Δεκέμβρης 1995 

 
 

 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ]



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            80        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE IVY OF OUR LOVE 

 

 

O ΚΙΣΣΟΣ ΤΗΣ ΑΓΑΠΗΣ ΜΑΣ 

 
 

A leaf of ivy is our visiting card 
like a cooling embrace and a refuge from the sun's 

scorching eye an evergreen palm forever open. 
 

A leaf of ivy is our laughter 
multicolour tongues ringing in harmony to the music of 
birdsong and the surging waves upon the shore here 

where our footsteps are luminous close upon the thyme 
 

We seek for traces of noble ancestors 
who in laying out their temples 

like the spreading ivy worshipped their gentle Gods and 
evergreen epics an olive crown their only prize. 

 
 

Dedicated to our dream for the Eco-Peace 
village that alas was not realised 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 

 
Φύλλο κισσού το επισκεπτήριο μας αγκάλιασμα δροσιάς 

και καταφύγιο απο το μάτι του ήλιου. 
Παλάμη πράσινη ανοιγμένη. 

 
Φύλλο κισσού το γέλιο μας 

γλώσσες πολύχρωμες, διακλαδώσεις μελωδικές, τρίλιες 
και παφλασμοί 

πατημασιές που φωσφορίζουνε πλάι στο Θυμάρι 
 

Τα χνάρια ν'ανιχνεύσουμε προγόνων ευγενών που ήπιους 
ελάτρεψαν Θεούς ναούς κισσούς απλώσανε χλωρίδας 

έπη και στεφάνια ελιάς. 
 

Αφιερωμένο στο όνειρο μας για το Οικολογικό χωριό 
«Κισσός» που δυστυχώς δεν πραγματοποιήθηκε 

  
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            81        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Philippou – Ladaki Niki (1937 – 2003) 
 

Was born in Nicosia.Studied Greek and English Literature at the Athens 
University.She worked  at the Cultural Services of the Ministry of Education.She had 
published several collections of poetry. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Λευκωσία και σπούδασε Ελληνική και Αγγλική Φιλολογία στην 
Αθήνα.Εργάστηκε στις Πολιτιστικές Υπηρεσίες του Υπουργείου Παιδείας.Δημοσίευσε 
πολλές Ποιητικές Συλλογές. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            82        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

I MIGRATE LIKE A BIRD 

 

 

ΜΙΣΕΥΩ ΣΑ ΠΟΥΛΙ 

 
 

I migrate like a bird, I die out like the wind 
I set like the sun 

 
when the sea assumes your face 

and in the evening makes herself beautiful 
for the strolling ladies 

 
when the jasmin smells 

like the musk of your breasts 
to tease the rest of tic girls 

and surpass them 
when Sunday puts on your dresses 

and copies your hairstyle 
to go as a little girl to church 

 
...I still have to learn so much about love. 

 
Translated  by: Poet 

 

 
Μισεύω σα πουλί, σβήνω σαν αγέρι γέρνω σαν ήλιος 

όταν η θάλασσα παίρνει το πρόσωπο σου 
και στολίζεται ώρα εσπερινή για να 'ναι όμορφη 

σα βγουν οι κυράδες για σεργιάνι 
όταν το γιασεμί της γειτονιάς παίρνει το μούσκο του 

κόρφου σου για να πειράξει όλες τις άλλες κοπελιές και 
να τις ξεπεράσει 

όταν η Κυριακή φοράει τα φουστάνια σου και τη χτενισιά 
σου για να πάει πρωί πρωί παιδούλα στην εκκλησιά. 

...Κι ακόμη έχω τόση αμάθεια για την αγάπη! 

 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            83        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Phylactou Takis (1919 ) 
 

Was born in Karavas in 1919.He studied  Insurance in London. He published his 
poems in several newspapers and magazines. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στο χωριό Καραβάς το 1919.  Αποφοίτησε από το Παγκύπριο Γυμνάσιο 
και στη συνέχεια σπούδασε ασφαλιστικά στο Λονδίνο.  Το 1952 είχε αναλάβει την οργάνωση 
και διεύθυνση των «Γενικών Ασφαλειών Κύπρου».  Ασχολήθηκε με την ποίηση και 
δημοσίευσε εργασίες του σε εφημερίδες και περιοδικά.  Ποιήματα του έχουν μεταφραστεί σε 
ξένες γλώσσες.  Το 1986 εξέδωσε την ποιητική συλλογή Παρένθεση.  Ασχολήθηκε επίσης με 
το χρονογράφημα και τη ζωγραφική. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            84        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

GEORGE 
 

ΓΙΩΡΓΟΣ 
 

Surrounded by the small bottles, 
Serum, iodine and aspirins, 

George 
- Central Chemist's Store 

216 Phaneromenis Street - 
kept company by his golden_ dreams 
and the long wait for the Unexpected, 

George is spending the balance 
of his years (he is note twenty six). 

 
Prescriptions and debts the routine, 

the friends who drop in to join 
their boredom with his own, 

the patchwork throng in the market. 
At midday the meal from the restaurant over the way 

Steak and kidney boiled and beans, kid ! – 
and the long wait far the Unexpected. 

If  I had happened to be George 
- Central Chemist's Store 

216 Ph.an.eromenis Street - 
I would throw out all the friends who come 

to join their boredom with mine, 
I would empty all the little bottles, 

Serum, iodine and the rest, into a huge cauldron, 
and I would plunge myself in it 

to cancel the balance of my years 
(the margin between twenty six and nothing). 

 
Translated by: Peter Thompson 

 
Ανάμεσα στα μπουκαλάκια του, 
«Venena», ιώδια κι ασπιρίνες, 

ο Γιώργος, 
«Φαρμακείον το Κεντρικόν» 
Φανερωμένης 216, Λευκωσία. 

Συντροφιά με τα χρυσά του όνειρα 
και την προσμονή του Ανέλπιστου 
ο Γιώργος περνά το υπόλοιπον 
του βίου (είναι τώρα 26 ετών). 

 
Καθημερινά οι συνταγές, τα βερεσέδια, 

οι φίλοι που πάνε να ενώσουν 
την πλήξη τους με την δική του, 

το πολύχρωμο πλήθος του παζαριού. 
Τα μεσημέρια φαγητό απ’ το αντικρινό εστιατόριο- 

«μισή ψητό και μία φασόλια, ρε μικρέ»- 
κι η προσμονή του Ανέλπιστου. 

 
Αν τύχαινε εγώ να ’μουνα ο Γιώργος, 

«Φαρμακείον το Κεντρικόν» 
Φανερωμένης 216, Λευκωσία, 

θα ’διωχνα όλους τους φίλους που έρχονται 
Να ενώσουν την πλήξη τους με τη δική μου. 

Θ’ άδειαζα όλα μου τα μπουκαλάκια, 
«Venena», ιώδια και τα λοιπά, σ’ ένα τεράστιο καζάνι 

και θα βυθιζόμουνα σ’ αυτό 
για να διανύσω το υπόλοιπον του βίου μου 
(διαφορά μεταξύ 26 ετών και του τίποτα). 

 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            85        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
 
Savvidou – Theodoulou Mona (1951) 
 

Born in Limassol.She studied Philology in Athens, and works in Secondary Education 
as a Headmistress.She has published seeral works of poetry, prose, theatre and criticism.She 
has also edited three poetry anthologies. She received the State Prize for Poetry in 1987.  
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Λεμεσό το 1951.Σπούδασε Φιλολογία στο Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών και 
εργάζεται ως Διευθύντρια Σχολείου στη Μέση Εκπαίδευση.Έχει δημοσιεύση 
ποίηση,πεζό,θεατρικό και κριτικές μελέτες.Έχει επίσης εκδώσει τρεις Ανθολογίες 
Ποίησης.Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            86        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The forest with the columns 

Cordova 

 

 

Το Δάσος με τους Κίονες 

Κόρδοβα 

 
 

Cross the garden with the orange trees 
first 

Do not reglect the footpath of the myrtle 
to be enchanted 

to fall in love 
to purify yourself 

The forest with the columns awaits you 
Do bring the birds 

along with the blossoms 
in your bosom or in your hair 

the dance of the soul awaits you 
it awaitw you in the forest 

 
Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 

 
Πέρασε απ’ την αυλή των πορτοκαλλιών 

πρώτα 
Μην ξεχάσεις το μονοπάτι της μυρτιάς 

να γοητευτείς 
να ερωτευτείς 
να εξαγνιστείς 

Σε περιμένει το δάσος με τους κίονες 
Πάρε και τα πουλιά 
μαζί με τους ανθούς 

στον κόρφο ή τα μαλλιά σου 
Σε περιμένει ο χορός της ψυχής 

Σε περιμένει στο δάσος 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            87        

 
 

  

[Index] 
Stavrou – Ioannidou Roulla (1951) 

 
 

 
 
 

Was born in Nicosia in 1951. Studied Greek and English Litterature at the University 
of Athens.Recently she received the National Litterature prizeJean Monnet.
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Λευκωσία το 1951. Ποιήτρια, πεζογράφος και θεατρική συγγραφέας. 
Είναι επίσης εκπαιδευτικός (ME) και ερευνήτρια. Σπούδασε ελληνική και αγγλική φιλολογία 
στο Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών. Αργότερα μετεκπαιδεύτηκε στο RSA , TEFL (UK) και πήρε το 
δίπλωμά της με διάκριση στη διδασκαλία. Σήμερα, εργάζεται ως Επιστημονική Συνεργάτις 
και Υπεύθυνη Εκδόσεων στο Γραφείο του Προεδρικού Επιτρόπου της Κυπριακής 
Δημοκρατίας. Το βιβλίο της «Κίτρινες Κορδέλες», τιμήθηκε πρόσφατα με το Διεθνές 
Λογοτεχνικό Βραβείο Jean Monnet. 

 
Έργα της μεταφράστηκαν στα Αγγλικά, Γερμανικά, Γαλλικά, Ιταλικά και Πολωνικά.

 

 [Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            88        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 

 

ENCLAVED 

 

 

Το φως του φεγγαριού 

 
 

The moonlight 
circles over the houses 

of the enclaved. 
Tearlessly and tirelessly 

their thoughts and dreams it seeks. 
unfolding them 

one by one, spreading its balm 
from one side of the soul to the other 

to soothe the wounds. 
Days come and go by. 
Pass through the fields 

with the ripen wheat on the lips. 
Hours come and go by 

from the hills to the bays 
from the capes to the valleys 
from the plundered churches 
to the deserted monasteries 
with their orphaned steeples. 

They come and go by. 
Then meet again. 

Hand in hand 
They begin to dance 

singing 
a song of blue and white 
Freedom, that they call, 

Liberty and peaceful Life. 
 

Translated by: Rhea Frangofinou - Roula 

Ioannidou-Stavrou 

 
κάνει κύκλους πάνω απ1 τα δέντρα 
ψάχνει ακούραστο κι αδάκρυτο 

τους αγνοούμενους σου 
ξεδιπλώνοντας τους στοχασμούς του 

ένα-ένα 
διηθώντας τις αναμνήσεις του 

μια-μια 
σκορπίζοντας το χλωμό του βάλσαμο 
απ1 τη μιαν άκρη ως την άλλη σου, 

Νησί μου, 
να γαληνέψει τις πληγές σου. 

Πάνε κι έρχονται 
τα βράδια του 

απ1 τις πορτοκαλιές της Μόρφου 
ως τις θάλασσες της Αμμόχωστος 

κι ακόμα 
ως τα ερημικά μοναστήρια της Καρπασίας 

με τα ορφανεμένα καμπαναριά. 
Πάνε κι έρχονται, 

κι ύστερα πάλι ξανασμίγουν. 
Πιάνονται χέρι-χέρι 
και στήνουνε χορό 

γύρω απ' τον Πενταδάκτυλο 
τραγουδώντας ένα τραγούδι από γαλαζόπετρα 

που το βαφτίσαν Λευτεριά. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            89        

 
 

  

[Index] 
Stylianou Theodoros (1927- 1998)  

 
Theodoros Stylianou was born in the village of Psimolofou in 1927, and died in 1998. 

He wrote poetry, and was a regular contributor to literary magazines and newspapers. He was 
awarded the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry in 1987. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 

Ο Θεόδωρος Στυλιανού γεννήθηκε στο χωριό Ψημολόφου το 1927 και πέθανε το 
1998.  Έγραψε ποίηση και λογοτεχνία σε περιοδικά και εφημερίδες.  Του απονεμήθηκ το 
βραβείο Cyprus State Prize for Poetry το 1987. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            90        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

THE VOYAGE 

 

 
ΤΟ ΤΑΞΙΔΙ 

 
And so this is our voyage, my Lady. 

It begins with the first chapter of disillusionment. We'll 
have a good time, wait and see, and with a contribution by 

Eliot. 
Because I know that time s always time 

And place s always and only place 
And what is actual s actual only for one time And only for 

one place...* 
A rainy English month of July 

has counted our days 
with the countenance of our March. This explains the rose 

gardens the lush trees the rivers the epidemic of green. 
No matter 

our voyage was good. 
Better on the way back 

with the added cargo of nostalgia. 
. 
 

Translated by: John Vickers 

 
Νάτο λοιπόν το ταξίδι μας, Κυρά μου. 

Αρχίζει με το πρώτο κεφάλαιο της απομυθοποίησης.  
Θα περάσουμε καλά, Θα το δεις και με τη συνδρομή του 

'Eλιοτ. 
Γιατί ξέρω ότι o χρόνος είναι πάντα χρόνος κι o τόπος 

πάντα και μονάχα τόπος 
κι ό,τι είναι σημερινό υπάρχει μόνο μια φορά και μόνο σ' 

ένα τόπο... 
'Evας βροχερός εγγλέζικος Ioύλης  

μέτρησε τις μέρες μας 
με το ύφος του Μάρτη του δικού μας.  

'Ετσι εξηγούνται οι ροδότοποι  
τα Θρασεμένα δέντρα τα ποτάμια η επιδημία του 

πράσινου. 
Κατά τα άλλα 

ήταν καλό το ταξίδι μας. Καλύτερο στο γυρισμό 
με το επιπρόσθετο φορτίο του νόστου. 

 

 

 [Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            91        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

Theocharidou Ianthe (1938) 
 

Born in 1938. Her main occupation is Literature.For her creative work she got 
thePrize of the Ministry of Education. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε το 1938. Ασχολείται με τη Λογοτεχνία. Για το έργο της τιμήθηκε από το 
Υπουργείο Παιδείας. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            92        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

CYPRIOT CHRONICLE 1 

 

 

ΚΥΠΡΙΑΚΟ ΧΡΟΝΙΚΟ Ι 

 
 

This island arose 
from the depths 

the sea parted at its ascent  
and it was the hour of dawn. 

 
Do not measure by the surface 

or by the head 
listen to the chest  
inside bells ring  

the ages. 
 

What you see from your dull window 
does not take into account the quality of the guts.  

X-rays are. read 
in their own light. 

 
Translated by: John Vickers 

 

 
Τούτο το νησί αναδύθηκε 

από πολύ βαθιά 
μέριασε η θάλασσα στ' ανέβασμα του 

κι ήταν η ώρα του όρθρου, 
Με την επιφάνεια μη μετράς μήτε με το κεφάλι 

 βάλε το ακουστικό στο         στέρνο του μέσα κτυπούν 
καμπάνες οι αιώνες. 

Το κοίταγμα απ’ το θαμπό σου τζάμι 
δεν σου υπολογίζει την ποιότητα των σπλάχνων. 

Οι Ακτίνες Χ διαβάζονται 
με το δικό τους φως. 

 

 [Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            93        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Zafeiriou Lefkios (1948) 

 
Lefkios Zaphiriou was born in Larnaca in 1948. He studied Philology and Journalism 

in Athens. He works in Secondary Education as Assistant Headmaster. He has published 
poetry and prose. He writes articles on politics, literary criticism, studies and essays. He has 
also edited an anthology of contemporary Cypriot poetry that was published in Athens. He 
has been awarded the Cyprus State Prizes for Poetry and for Prose. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 

Γεννήθηκε στη Λάρνακα το 1948. Σπούδασε φιλολογία και δημοσιογραφία στην 
Αθήνα.Εργάζεται ως Β.Διευθυντής στη Μέση Εκπαίδευση.Έχει δημοσιεύσει ποίηση και 
πεζογραφία.Τιμήθηκε με Κρατικά βραβεία Ποίησης. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            94        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

KARYOTAKIS IN PARIS AND IN THE 
COFFEE SHOP “THE HEAVENLY 

GARDEN” 

FIRST VARIATION 

Alone 

 

 

Ο Καρυωτάκης στο  Παρίσι και στο 
καφενείο «Ο ουράνιος κήπος» 

Πρώτη παραλλαγή 

Μόνος 

 

 
At the Hotel de la Sorbonne 

He writes to his brother: 
‘Yesterday I was at Moulin Rouge’ 

the following day in Athens 
the usual is decided: “You are transferred to the 

Prefectureof Preveza.’ 
This is nothing yoy know 

While sitting at the coffee shop 
The Heavenly Garden two steps 

From the sea,like that time 
In Paris on the desolate street 

 when he was pacing 
with palpable sorrow on the irverted 

face – just two steps 
away from his death. 

 
 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 

 
Στο Hotel de la Sorbonne 
Γράφει στο αδελφό του: 

«Χθες ήμουν στο Moulin Rouge». 
Την άλλη μέρα στην Αθήνα 

αποφασίζουν τα γνωστά: «Μετετέθητε 
εις την Νομαρχία Πρεβέζης». 
«Ξέρεις πως είναι ολα αυτά» 
όταν κάθεται στο καφενείο 

Ο Ουράνιος Κήπος δύο βήματα 
απ΄τη θάλασσα,όπως τότε 

στο Παρίσι στον έρημο δρόμο βημάτιζε 
με βέβαιη τη θλίψη στο ανεστραμμένο 

πρόσωπο – μόλις δύο βήματα 
από το θάνατό του. 

 
 
  

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ]  

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            95        

 
 

  

 [Index] 
Chrysanthis Kypros (1915 – 1998 ) 
 

Was born in Nicosia in 1915 and died in  the same town in 1998.He published the 
magazine  Pneumatiki Kypros.He published several collections of poetry, novels and plays. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 
 

Ξεχωριστός ποιητής, πεζογράφος, θεατρικός συγγραφέας, κριτικός.  Γεννήθηκε στην 
Λευκωσία το 1915.  Από το 1960 εκδίδει το περιοδικό Πνευματική Κύπρος.  Το ποιητικό του 
έργο κρίνεται σ’ ένα μεγάλο εύρος που εκκινεί από ένα  παραδοσιακό λυρισμό, παράλληλα 
με μια συνάντηση και αφομοίωση της δημώδους κυπριακής λογοτεχνίας και φτάνει σε 
ώριμους στίχους νεότερης γραφής.   

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            96        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

WOMAN TYING HER SHOE 

By Renoir 

 

Η γυναίκα που φορεί το παπούτσι 
της 

Του Ρενουάρ 

 
 
 

The line on your translucent body fragrant with feeling, 
a dawn of kisses. 

The flame has reflected you. The hue has plunged to plum  
bed sheets an embrace. 

 
How the pose torments! It grafts the mind 

a rosebush in May. 
The fruit bows with feeling and the bough quivers 

like a lip to kisses. 
The awakening of the mind to beauty, doesn't it seduce? 

It drives the Gods wild. 
With a stem of jasmine it carves our flesh 

with wispy yearnings. 
In oceans of mauve your outline was imprinted  

dew upon a rock, 
the sentiment that begot your body engages the light  

and the pose torments.  
 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 

 
 

Μυρίζει αισθήματα η γραμμή στο διάφανό σου σώμα, 
                            μια χαραυγή φιλιά. 

Η φλόγα σε καθρέφτισε.Βυσίνισε το χρώμα 
          σεντόνια μια αγκαλιά. 

Η στάση πόσο τυραννά! Τον στοχασμό μπολιάζει 
      τον Μάη τριανταφυλλιά. 

Γέρνει η οπώρα μ΄αίσθημα και το κλαδί σπαράζει 
      Σα χείλη στα φιλιά. 

 
Της ομορφιάς το ξύπνημα του νου δεν ξελογιάζει; 

       Τρελλαίνει τους Θεούς. 
Μ΄ένα κομμάτι γιασεμί τη σάρκα μας χαράζει 

         με  ανάλαφρους καυμούς. 
Στους βύσινους  ωκεανούς τυπώθηκε η γραμμή σου 

            βράχου κορφοσταλιά, 
έπαιξε το αίσθημα σα φως και πάει με το κορμί σου 

          κι η στάση τυραννά. 
 
 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            97        

 
 

  

[Index] 
Neshe Yasin (1959) 
 

 

 
 
Neshe Yasin is a Turkish Cypriot poet and journalist. She was born in Peristerona  in 

1959. Her work is well known to both communities in Cyprus. She writes in Turkish but her 
poetry and articles are regularly translated into Greek language. She has been a columnist for 
newspapers published in both sides of the island and also in Turkey. She has written the lyrics 
of a very popular song composed by a Greek Cypriot musician and sung by different singers 
in Cyprus, Turkey and Greece. The lines of this poem "My country has been diveded in 
two/which of the two halves should I love?", very well express her feelings towards her 
divided country. She is involved in 
peace-buildning activities in Cyprus from a very young age and she delivers speeches all over 
the island to help for reconciliation in Cyprus. Nowadays she is a lecturer at Cyprus 
University situated in the Greek Cypriot part of the diveded island.

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 
H Neshe Yasin είναι Τουρκοκύπρια ποιήτρια και δημοσιογράφος.Γεννήθηκε το 1959 

στην Περιστερώνα.  Η δουλειά της είναι πολύ γνωστή και στις δύο κοινότητες στην Κύπρο.  
Γράφει στα τουρκικά αλλά τα ποιήματα και τα άρθρα της συνήθως μεταφράζονται στην 
ελληνική γλώσσα.  Είναι αρθρογράφος στις εφημερίδες που εκδίδονται και στις δύο 
κοινότητες ως επίσης και στην Τουρκία.  ’Εχει γράψει τους στίχους του πολύ γνωστού 
τραγουδιού «Η  δική μου η πατρίδα έχει μοιραστεί στα δυό ποιο από τα δυό κομμάτια πρέπει 
να αγαπω», το οποίο έχει μελοποιηθεί από κύπριο συνθέτη και έχει ερμηνευθεί από 
διάφορους τραγουδιστές στην Τουρκία και στην Ελλάδα.  Με το τραγούδι αυτό εκφράζει τα 
αισθήματά της απέναντι στη μοιρασμένη της πατρίδα.  Διοργανώνει διάφορες εκδηλώσεις για 
την οικοδόμηση της ειρήνης στη Κύπρο από πολύ μικρή και κάνει διαλέξεις σε όλο το νησί, 
ώστε να βοηθήσει στην επανένωση της Κύπρου.  Σήμερα είναι λέκτορας στο Πανεπιστήμιο 
Κύπρου που βρίσκεται στην Ελληνοκυπριακή πλευρά του μοιρασμένου νησιού. 
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            98        

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
 

 

UNSENT LETTERS  

VI 

 

 

ΑΠΑΡΑΠΕΜΠΤΑ ΠΟΙΗΜΑΤΑ 

VI 

 
n a musty cell 

I am a tangled up ball of wool 
This is not Berlin 
don't expect me 

I too expect you not to expect me 
If they were to shoot us  

what would remain? 
 

If anything was to be shot love would be  
craziness in itself 

If only the address of the two of us was the same. 
 

XII 
History buy me a Berlin 

I want to take him in my arms  
to run and run 

to find him amongst the crowds  
with hundred degree love  

to return to each other 
Add me to him, him to me  
History buy me a Berlin. 

Poem is written in English 

Σ΄ένα κελί που μυρίζει μούχλα 
Κουβάρι μπερδεμένο είμαι 
Εδώ δεν είναι Βερολίνο 

Μη με καρτερείς 
Περιμένω κι εγώ να μη με καρτερείς 

Αν μας πυροβολήσουν 
Τι απομένει; 

 
Αν μας πυροβολήσουν τον έρωτα χτυπάνε 

Είναι ολότερος αυτός 
 

Να είχαμε μια μόνο διεύθυνση κι οι δύο 
ΧΙΙ 

’Ενα Βερολίνο δώσε μου Ιστορία 
Να τον αγκαλιάσω θέλω 

Να τρέξω να τρέξω 
Μες στο πλήθος να τον βρω 

Να σμίξουμε 
Με εκατό βαθμούς αγάπη 

 
Εμέ μ’ αυτόν, κι αυτόν σε μένα πρόσθεσε 

Ένα Βερολίνο δως μου Ιστορία 

  
 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            99        

 
 

  

[Index] 

 
 

My country 

 

 

Η πατρίδα μου 

 
My father says 

Love your country  
My country is 

Dived in to two 
Which part should 

I love 
 

Translated by:Poet 

Την πατρίδα να αγαπάς 
Έτσι λέει ο πατέρας μου συχνά 

Η δική μου η πατρίδα 
Έχει μοιραστεί στα δυό 
Πιο απο τα δυο κομμάτια 

Πρέπει να αγαπώ 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 
 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            100    

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Galazi Pitsa 
 

Was born in Limassol.  She studied Political Sciences and Sociology in Athens.  She 
worked as a producer of cultural programmes at the Cyprus Brodcasting Corporation.  She 
has published numerous collections of poetry, essays, studies and several monographs on 
Cypriot Literature.  She has repeatedly received the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry.  She was 
also awarded the Prize for Poetry of the Academy of Athens, and the Magna Crecia Prize of 
South Italy. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 
Γεννήθηκε στην Λεμεσό και σπούδασε Πολιτικές Επιστήμες και Κοινωνιολογία στην 

Αθήνα.  Εργάστηκε σαν παραγωγός πολιτιστικών εκπομπών στο Ραδιοφωνικό Ίδρυμα 
Κύπρου και σε ιδιωτικούς ραδιοφωνικούς σταθμούς.  ’Εγραψε και δημοσίευσε ποίηση, 
δοκίμια, μελέτες, μονογραφίες κ.α.  Τιμήθηκε επανειλημμένα με Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίσησης, 
με το Βραβείο Ποίησης της Ακαδημίας Αθηνών και με το βραβείο Magna Grecia της Νότιας 
Ιταλίας. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            101    

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

ALBERT CAMUS 
 

ΑΛΜΠΕΡ ΚΑΜΥ 
 

Still raw resonates in the skull 
The sudden assault of your departure 

Fracturing my youth 
And not one minute of silence in time 
Ta palpate the scar of the irreparable 

 
Because you were one of our own Albert 

Splashing in the waters 
Of the Mediterraneans´s south shore 

The way they speak to our blood 
Its summers searing hot 

And our old dreams 
On skin of terracotta, 

 
And you playing with or myths 

Pursuing Helet to Troy 
And then raising the Voice 

To abolish the gallows from the world* 
 

Alone at an opposite shore we listen 
Holding the words one by one 

Flowers in books and inside albums 
That tell of your lineage and character 

 
Because words are handgrips for life 

And the abyss waits beneath the words 
Suspending us high from the presipice 

Heartlessness and inhumanity that persist 
And you supply the handggrips 

And the footholds with choosen words 
So that the world may stand ree 

And that Man may be tha Alpha and Omega 
 

More Strangers now than ever 

 
Ηχεί ακόμα νωπή στο κρανίο 

Η ξαφνική ομοβροντία της αναχώρησης σου 
Να ραγίζει τη νιότη μου 

Κι ούτε ενός λεπτού σιγή μες’ στον χρόνο 
Ψαχουλεύοντας την ουλή του ανεπανόρθωτου 

 
Γιατί ήσουν δικός μας Αλμπέρ 

Να πιτσιλλίζεις στα νερά 
Της νότιας ακτής της Μεσογείου 
Όπως στο αίμα μας μιλούν 
Τα καλοκαίρια της καυτά 
Και τα παλιά μας όνειρα 
Σε δέρμα τερρακότα, 

 
Και συ να παίζεις με τους μύθους μας 
Να κυνηγάς στην Τροία την ’Ελένη 
Κι ύστερα να σηκώνεις τη Φωνή 

Να καταργήσεις απ’ τον κόσμο την αγχόνη* 
 

Μόνοι σ’ απέναντι ακτή ν’ ακροαζόμαστε 
Μια μια τις λέξεις να κρατάμε 

Λουλούδια σε βιβλία και λευκώματα 
Για την καταγωγή και για το ήθος σου να λένε 

 
Γιατί οι λέξεις για να ζήσεις είναι κράτημα 
Κι άβυσσος κάτω απ’ τις λέξεις περιμένει 
Μας αιωρεί από ψηλά στο βάραθρο 

Η απονιά κι η απανθρωπιά που επιμένει 
Κι εσύ να δίνεις τα κρατήματα 

Και τα πατήματα με λέξεις διαλεγμένες 
Ελεύθερος ο κόσμος να σταθεί 

Κι ο Άνθρωπος το Άλφα και το Ωμέγα 
 

Τώρα πιο Ξένοι από ποτέ 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            102    

 
 

  

With the Plague a threat to us 
Enclosed within a threat the walls they have set for us 

Sisyphean our life 
We leave to your voice an amulet 

Sun-filled Summer 
Balsam on the wounds of a tormented land 

That will eternally bless your memory Albert. 
 

Laurel leaves I set alight ammid the poems 
Words to fing you, signals 

I remain devoted to dreams 
And since you left much too soon 

I refuse 
To say goodnight to you 

 
* Reference to his clemercy appeal to the Queen of 
England regarding the execution of freedom fighter 
Michalakis Karaolis, during the Cyptiot Liberation 

Struggle of 1955-60. 
 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 

Με την Πανούκλα απειλή μας 
Κλεισμένη μες’ στα τείχη που μας ώρισαν 

Σισύφεια η ζωή μας 
Κρατάμε την φωνή σου φυλακτό 

Λιόχαρο Καλοκαίρι 
Λαδάκι στις πληγές τόπου πολύπαθου 
Που εσαεί Αλμπέρ σε μνημονεύει. 

 
Δάφνες ανάβω μες’ στα ποιήματα 
Λέξεις για να σε βρουν σινιάλα 

Στα όνειρα φανατική 
Κι έτσι όπως έφυγες νωρίς 
Την καληνύχτα να σου πω 

Αρνιέμαι 
 

* Αναφορά στην έκκληση του στh βασίλισσα της 
Αγγλίας για σωτηρία του Μιχ. Καραολή 
 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            103    

 
 

  

[Index] 
 

 

CAMILLE CLAUDEL 

 Ι 

 

 

ΚΑΜΙΛ ΚΛΩΝΤΕΛ 

I 

 
 

How beautiful you are Woman Strange 
Glowing in the torment of the ineffable With a smile a sun 

Lighting the stone to open The potable water 
I have found you in your water The sparkling 

That would rise dark 
So the world could be reflected in its light A mystery of 

transformed minerals Of a rich subsoil 
Beautiful beloved of pain 

Tormented missing woman 
Alone because you loved so much Spendthrift you lent, 
gave, gave away And no one gave back not a crumb To 

the bird of your soul that croaked Terror and thirst 
Your multiform soul stands in statues With the bending of 
the crops In the breath of the wind Small Camille of the 

fields of dreams 
Small Camille in the ecstasy of Eros 

Great and inexperienced in boundless love And divine 
with your golden hands In anything you mold 

Camille missing Woman 
In denial, bitter you are hallowed 

I touch your image in everything you 've made May you 
blossom now and always. 

ιι 
I watched you unexpectedly take wing Over the gardens 

with the pergolas And over the peculiar roofs of Paris 
In dance like the movement of your statues Waving your 

arms and the taffetas of your dresses rustling 
Waiting for you at the gates of the heavens Young 

handsome, noble 

The fine writer and the rare poet Vizyinos Georgios the 
Hellene 

 
Τι ωραία που είσαι Γυναίκα 

Παράξενη 
Λάμπουσα μεσ' στο μαρτύριο του άφατου Με ένα 

χαμόγελο ήλιο Να φωτίζει την πέτρα v' ανοίγει Το ύδωρ το 
πότιμον 

Απ' το νερό σου σε βρήκα 
Το γάργαρο 

Που σκοτεινό ανέβαινε 
Να καθρεφτίζεται o κόσμος στο φως του Μυστήριο 
μεταπλασμένων ορυκτών Υπεδάφους πλούσιου 

Ωραία αγαπημένη του πόνου Βασανισμένη γυναίκα 
αγνοούμενη Μόνη επειδή πολύ αγάπησες Σπάταλη 

δάνειζες, χάριζες, έδινες 
Και ουδείς ουδέν ψυχίον έστω επέστρεψε Για το πουλί της 

ψυχής σου που έκρωζε Τρόμο και δίψα 
H ψυχή σου πολύμορφη στέκει σ' αγάλματα Με των 

σπαρτών το λύγισμα Στο φύσημα τ' ανέμου Μικρή Καμίλ 
των κάμπων με τα όνειρα 

Μικρή Καμίλ σε έκσταση αγάπης Μεγάλη κι αλογάριαστη 
του έρωτα Και Θεϊκή με τα χρυσά σου χέρια Σ' ό,τι 

πλάθεις 
Καμίλ Γυναίκα αγνοούμενη 

Μέσα στην άρνηση, πικρή v' αγιάζεις Σε ό,τι έφτιαξες 
αγγίζω την εικόνα σου Νυν και αεί να Θάλλεις. 

ιι 
Σε έβλεπα ξαφνικά v' ανίπτασαι 

Πάνω από τους κήπους με τις πέργολες 
Κι απ' τις παράξενες του Παρισιού τις στέγες Χορευτική 
όπως των αγαλμάτων σου την κίνηση Να γνέφεις και των 

φορεμάτων σου Να φουρφουρίζουν οι ταφτάδες 
Σε καρτερεί στην πόρτα τ' ουρανού 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            104    

 
 

  

Holding his elegant cane and straw hat Preparing to take 
a bow To ask you to a first waltz In a real world Camille 

Claudel 

Paris, 1996 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

  

 

Νέος ωραίος, ευγενής 
O λογοτέχνης o εκλεκτός κι o σπάνιος ποιητής Βυζυηνός 

Γεώργιος o 'Ελλην 
Με το κομψό μπαστούνι και στο χέρι το ψαθάκι του 

'Ετοιμος να υποκλιθεί 
Το πρώτο βαλς σε κόσμο αληθινό Καμίλ Κλωντέλ να σου 

ζητήσει 

Παρίσι, 1996 

 
 

 
[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            105    

 
 

  

[Index] 
 
Nora Nadjarian 
 

Nora Nadjarian was born in Limassol.  She writes poetry and short fiction, primarily 
in English, though her work has also been published in Greek.  She has published collections 
of poetry, and won international awards for her wiriting.  Two of her short stories were 
runners-up in the Commonwealth Short Story Completion in 2001 and 2002. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 
 
 

Η Νόρα Νατζιαριάν γεννήθηκε στη Λεμεσό.  Γράφει ποίηση και μικρής έκτασης 
πεζογραφήματα, κυρίως στην Αγγλική, αν και έχει δημοσιεύσει επίσης κείμενα της στην 
Ελληνική.  ’Εχει δημοσιεύσει ποίηση και κέρδισε διεθνείς διακρίσεις για τα έργα της.  
Μεταξύ άλλων πεζογραφήματα της έτυχαν διακρίσεων στους Κοινοπολιτειακούς 
Διαγωνισμούς Διηγήματος το 2001  και 2002. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            106    

 
 

  

[Index] 

 

The tears of Dora Maar 

“Weeping Woman,” Pablo Picasso, 
1937 

Τα δάκρυα της Dora Maar 

“Γυναίκα που κλαίει»,  

Pablo Picasso, 1937 
 

He paints the salt tears 
Pinning into her cheeks, 
The blue sobs trapped in 

The curl of her lips, 
Her whole life soaking 
A white handkerchief. 

 
“this is the painting of was. 

Dora, you are Spain”. 
 

He paints her a widow; 
Black, purple, a red hat, 
Her hari in strips, hands 

Green, heavy with horror. 
 

Creases on a face 
Have no end 

In war, no beginning. 
“I wanted to be a woman, Pablo. 

Not a War.” 

 

Ζωγραφίζει τ’ αλμυρά, τα καρφωμένα 
Στα μάγουλα της δάκρυα, 

Τους στεναγμούς της θλίψης 
Τους παγιδευμένους στων χειλιών το γύρο, 

Η ζωή της όλη να ποτίζει 
Ένα λευκό μαντήλι. 

 
«Αυτός είναι πίνακας, Dora, 

Του πολέμου, είναι η Ισπανία». 
 

Τη ζωγραφίζει χήρα· 
Μαύρο, πορφυρό, κόκκινο καπέλο, 

Τα μαλιά λωρίδες, χέρια 
Πράσινα, βαρία απ’ τον τρόμο. 

 
Οι ρυτίδες στο πρόσωπο 

Μέσα στον πόλεμο δεν έχουν τέλος 
Μα ούτε αρχή. 

«Γυναίκα θα ’θελα να ’μαι, 
Όχι ένα πόλεμος, Pablo”. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 

 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            107    

 
 

  

 [Index] 
Kyriakos Charalambides (1940) 
 

 
Kyriakos Charalambides was born in Famagusta in 1940. He studίed History and 

Archaeology in Athens. He worked at the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation and retired as 
Head of Radio Programmes. He has published numerous collections of poetry, translations 
and essays. He has received the Cyprus State Prize for Poetry, the Prize for Poetry by the 
Academy of Athens, the National Prize for Poetry in Greece, and the Cavafy Prize in Egypt. 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 
 

 
 

Κυριάιcος Χαραλαμπίδης γεννήθηκε στην Αμμόχωστο το 1940. Σπούδασε Ιστορία 
και Αρχαιολογία στην Αθήνα. Εργάστηκε στο Ραδιοφωνικό 'Ιδρυμα Κύπρου απ' όπου 
αφυπηρέτησε από τη Θέση τοι Διευθυντή Προγραμμάτων Ραδιοφώνου. Δημοσίευσε ποίηση, 
λογοτεχνικές μεταφράσεις, δοκίμια. Τιμήθηκε με το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποί^σης στην Κύπρο 
και στην Ελλάδα, με το Βραβείο Ποίησης της Ακαδrμίας Αθηνών και με το Βραβείο Καβάφη 
στην Αίγυπτο. 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            108    

 
 

  

 
 

NONECIELO 

 

 

ΝΟΝΕΤΣΙΕΛΟ 

 
When Nonecielo suspected 

that his colors and themes were bung stolen in his studio 
for fifteen days he shut himself doing nothing but standing 

guard. 
Every three days on a cane his neighbor 

passed him through the skylight 
a flask of water,a bit of bread, salt meat and almonds. 

But even these he would examine carefully. 
pouring a little water in his palm. 

crumbling the bread, the flesh of the almond and falling to 
see how much of a stranger he had become to a t .. ,vas 

himself. 
Nonecielo, to whom an emperor 

had paid ten escuda to paint his likeness. Whom even the 
Archangel Gabriel had asked retouch his wing. 

He, to whom mia Madonna had leaned and smiles c.. and 
instantly he saw his pitcher walk. 

Oh, you, who once were the end of ugliness 
so stern about everything motley and cc's Colors become 
petrified uncompromising with the moisture of your former 
gaze. vacant of sound words mix their shells with those of 

the hollow almonds. 
And for what? So you can be a household set of your own 

omnipotence. You make your divine art fit to rob you; 
you envy something that resembles you. you close your 

paintings too soon; lower the blinds of their crystals, 
smash the faces of the hegemons who havve placed in 

your hands their wallets. 
You might call your acts "duty of resistance. 

But you, who once seduced colors, now oppress them. 
And from them a roar no longer emerges; 

you have revoked their voices and obscured their faces 

'Οταν ο Νονετσιέλο υποπτεύθηκε 
πως του κλέβαν τα θέματα και τα χρώματα κλείστηκε 

δεκαπέντε μέρες στ' αργαστήρι του και δεν έκανε τίποτα 
παρά να παραφυλάγει. 

H γειτόνισσά του με καλάμι του περνούσε 
το φλασκί νερό κάθε τρεις μέρες, 

λίγο ψωμί, αλατισμένο κρέας και μύγδαλα μέσ' από το 
φεγγίτη. 

Μα και τούτα τα εξέταζε προσεκτικά' 
έχυνε λίγο απ' το νερό στη χούφτα του, 

μαδούσε το ψωμί, την ψίχα του μυγδάλου και δεν 
καταλάβαινε το πόσο ξένος ήτανε προς καθετί δικό του. 

O Νονετσιέλο, που ένας αυτοκράτορας 
τού' δωκε δέκα σκούδα να του φτιάξει το είδωλο. Που 

ακόμα κι o Αρχάγγελος Γαβριήλ 
μια μέρα του είπε να του σιάξει λίγο με πινέλο τη 

φτερούγα του. Αυτός, που γέρνοντας προς τη μεριά του η 
mia madonna του χαμογέλασε κι αμέσως εϊδε το κανάτι 

του να περπατά. 
Ω, συ, που κάποτε ήσουνα το τέλος της ασκήμιας, τόσο 
αυστηρός για κάθε παρδαλό και κρύο. Τα χρώματα 

πετρώνουν ασυμβίβαστα με την υγρότητα του παλαιού 
σου βλέμματος, 

οι λέξεις αδειανές από ήχο σμίγουνε το τσόφλι τους με 
κείνονε των κούφιων αμυγδάλων. Κι αυτά προς τι; Για να' 
σαι κατοικίδιο της παντοδυναμίας του εαυτού σου. Τη 

θεόμορφή σου τέχνη 
την καθιστάς αρμόδια να σε ληστεύει ζηλεύεις από κάτι 

που σου μοιάζει, 
κλεϊνεις τους πίνακές σου από νωρίς, κατεβάζεις τα ρολά 
των κρυστάλλων τους, Θρυμματίζεις τα μούτρα ηγεμόνων 

που έβαλαν το πουγκί τους στο χέρι σου. 
Θα μπορούσε την πράξη σου αυτή να την έλεγες «χρέος 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            109    

 
 

  

with cloths and aprons, with tatters of curtains. 
You could have been the Evangelist Luke, 

or the Venice lion growling at death. 
You could have been... What is wrong with us humans? 

We want this and that, we suppose possibilities 
that do not move forward in the era of our careless time. 

But I catch my colors trying to fool me. 
Trust no color, not even one. Once I had fallen in love with 
red, then with yellow, green and mauve - imagine a wound 

with these colors. 
A sense of the heavy waters that will raise the indicators 

of my tears above the clouds... 
These were the painter's thoughts. But elsewhere the sun 

rose openhearted and fragrant. 
Nonecielo became frustrated; slammed the door in the 

sun's face, painted the skylight - the means of his food - 
black and unwittingly witnessed the e c l i p s e. 

He wondered about the dim light falling on the darkness. 
He had supposed that the chiaroscuro corresponded to 

other things; an earthen cask, for instance, in the 
countryside. 

He had never imagined such a wealth of ideas. He had to 
hide, suffocate them too, lest they be stolen by the same 

thieves. Then his every cell would fall to idleness 
and he would no longer worry. Or so he thought. 

Deep in the night they struck him on the head. He jumped 
up immortal, bathed in red. Yellow sat on his face, 

his body was trembling mauve. And old painter, 
one of the masters, dressed in green said to him: 

To your feet, fool, away from here; go mix colors for us. 
This will be your punishment. 

You have tormented your heroes far too much, that king is 
all but lame 

and the one who is leaning, dropping his crown on his 
dog's head - shame! 

Shout out if you must that you are colorblind, say what you 
wish, no one is listening. Look for a hole in which to crawl 

but do not come out without new colors. 

αντίστασης». Αλλά συ που τα χρώματα παλαιόθεν 
ξεμυάλιζες, τα δυναστεύεις. 

Και βοή από μέρους τους πια δεν υπάρχει 
τη φωνή τους εσήκωσες και το πρόσωπο έκρυψες με κάτι 

ρούχα και ποδιές, κομμάτια από κουρτίνες. 
Θα μπορούσε να ήσουν o Ευαγγελιστής Λουκάς 

ή το λιοντάρι της Βενετιάς με βρυχηθμό προς το θάνατο. 
Θα μπορούσε... Τι στο διάολο πάθαμε οι άνθρωποι; 
Θέλουμε το' να και τ' άλλο, υποθέτουμε δυνατότητες 

που δεν προχωρούν στον καιρό του απρόσεκτου χρόνου 
μας. 

Αλλ' εγώ συλλαμβάνω τα χρώματά μου να σκέφτονται 
πώς να με ξεγελάσουν. 

Μην εμπιστεύεστε χρώμα κανένα. 
Κάποτε είχα το κόκκινο αγαπήσει, 

ακολουθούσε το κίτρινο, το πράσινο και το μαβί - να 
φανταστείτε μια πληγή μ' αυτά τα χρώματα. Αίσθηση του 

παχιού νερού που Θ' ανεβάσει 
τους δείχτες των δακρύων μου πάνω από τα σύννεφα... 
Τέτοια o ζωγράφος. Αλλά κάπου o ήλιος ανοιχτόκαρδος 

πρόβαλλε γεμάτος αρώματα. 
O Νονετσιέλο αγανάχτησε του έκλεισε την πόρτα 

κατάμουτρα, έβαψε το φεγγίτη - αυτόν της τροφής του - με 
μαύρο και είδε την έ κ λ ε ι ψ η άθελά του. 

Απόρεσε που έπεφτε φως σκιερό επάνω στο σκοτάδι. 
Το κιαροσκούρο το υπέθετε μάλλον αντίστοιχο άλλων 
πραγμάτων ένα πιθάρι, για παράδειγμα, στην εξοχή. 

Δε φανταζότανε να έχει τόσο πλούτο ιδεών. 'Επρεπε να 
τις κρύψει κι αυτές, να τις πνίξει, να μην του τις κλέψουν 
οι ίδιοι πάλι ληστές. Και v' αδρανήσει κάθε κύτταρό του 
για να 'χει το κεφάλι του ήσυχο. 'Ετσι νόμιζε αυτός. 

 
Νύχτα βαθιά τον χτυπήσανε με μια μαγκούρα στο κεφάλι. 

Αναπετάχτηκε αθάνατος, πλέοντας στο κόκκινο. Το 
κίτρινο κάθισε στο πρόσωπό του, το σώμα του μαβί τον 

έτρεμε. Παλαιός ζωγράφος, 
απ' τους μαστόρους, πράσινα φορώντας του είπε: 

Να σηκωθείς, ανόητε, από δω' 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            110    

 
 

  

We will know if you have told us the truth when the lie falls 
and dies. 

November, 1979 

Translated by: Irena Ioannides 

 
 

άμε να φτιάξεις χρώματα για μας. Η τιμωρία σου άλλη δε 
θα είναι. Βασάνισες πολύ τους ήρωές σου, σχεδόν 

κουτσάθηκε αυτός o βασιλιάς 
κι αυτός εδώ που σκύβει πέφτει του η κορόνα 

επάνω στου σκυλιού του το κεφάλι - ντροπής πράματα! 
Σκλήριζε συ, πως έχεις αχρωματοψία, λάλει ό,τι Θες, 

κανένας δε σ' ακούει. Ψάξε να βρεις λαγούμι για να μπεις 
αλλά μη βγεις χωρίς καινούργια χρώματα. 

Εμείς Θα ξέρουμε αν μας είπες την αλήθεια όταν το ψέμα 
πέσει και πεθάνει. 
Νοέμβρης, 1979 

 

 

[Index] [ Cypriot Poets ] 



EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            111    

 
 

  

[Index] 

Greek Literature 

 

Overview 
 

The chosen poems cover a period of 120-130 years, from the beginning of the 19th 
century until the end of the 1940’s.  

 
Τhe 19th Century begins with the most important event of the recent Greek history, the 

revolution against Ottoman empire. In 1830  new Greek state was created and during the 19th 
century all the military and economic efforts focus on the development of this new state, but 
unfortunately Greece remains a small and poor country.  

 
In the 20th century Greece doubles its territory and the upper class try to create a 

modern country. After the 1st World war a tragic historical event blasts the Greek nation: the 
Asia Minor Disaster. In the 2nd Work\ld war Greek people fight against Nazism but after the 
end of the world war a new disaster strikes the Greek society: The Greek civil war. 

 

[Index]  

 

Περίληψη 
 

Τα επιλεγμένα ποιήματα καλύπτουν μια περίοδο 120-130 χρόνων από την αρχή του 
19ου αιώνα μέχρι το τέλος της δεκαετίας του 40. 

 
 Ο 19ος αιώνας αρχίζει με τα πιο σημαντικό γεγονός της σύγχρονης ελληνικής 

ιστορίας, την επανάσταση εναντίον της Τουρκικής αυτοκρατορίας. Το 1830 ένα νέο 
Ελληνικό κράτος δημιουργείται και κατά τη διάρκεια του 19ου αιώνα οι στρατιωτικές και 
οικονομικές προσπάθειες εστιάζουν στην ανάπτυξη του νέου κράτους, αλλά δυστυχώς η 
Ελλάδα παραμένει μια μικρή και φτωχή χώρα.  

 
Τον 20ο αιώνα η Ελλάδα διπλασιάζει την έκτασή της και η ανώτερη κλάση προσπαθεί 

να δημιουργήσει μια σύγχρονη χώρα. Μετά τον 1ο Παγκόσμιο πόλεμο ένα τραγικό ιστορικό 
γεγονός επηρεάζει την Ελλάδα: η καταστροφή της Μικράς Ασίας. Στο 2ο Παγκόσμιο πόλεμο 
ο ελληνικός λαός πολέμησε ενάντια στο ναζισμό αλλά μετά το τέλος του πολέμου μια νέα 
καταστροφή χτυπά την ελληνική κοινωνία: ο εμφύλιος πόλεμος. 

 

[Index] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            112    

 

  

[Index]   

Greek Poets 
 
Athanasoulis Kriton

Alexandrou Ares

Anagnostakis Manolis

Antoniou Takis

Avyeris Markos

Vakalo Eleni

Varnalis Kostas

Vafopoulos Giorgos

Vretakos Nikiforos

Gatsos Nikos

Dhalas Yianis

Dhimakis Minas

Dhimoulas Athos

Dhikteos Ares

Dhoukaris Demetres

Dhrakontaedes Philippos

Dhrosinis Giorgos

Engonopoulos Nikos

Elytis Odysseus

Embericos Andreas

Evangelou Anestis

Thasites Panos

Themelis Giorgos

Kavadias Nikos

Kavafis Konstandinos

Kazantzakis Nikos

Karelli Zoe  

Karyiotakis Kostas

Katsaros Mihales

Kotsiras Yioryis

Nikolaedes Aristoteles

Ouranis Kostas

Palamas Kostis

Papadhitsas Dhimitris

Papatsonis Takis

Patrikios Titos

Pittas Triantafillos

Polemis Ioannis

Ritsos Yiannis

Sarantaris Giorgos

Sahtouris Miltos

Seferis Υioryos

Sikelianos Angelos

Sinopoulos Takis

Solomos Dhionisios 

Stasinopoulos Michael

Stoyianidhis Yioryos

Fragopoulos Theofilos

 

[Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    113                            

 

  

[Index] 

Athanasoulis Kriton (1916 - 1979) 
 

 
 

 

Kritos Athanasoulis was born on 1916 in the town of Tripolis, Greece. His poetry 
began with lyrical and social features but was progressively driven to existential agony and 
internal dialogue. He had published twenty-one books of poetry, including a collected edition 
in two volumes. He won the First International Prize conducted by the Italian Magazine 
Batallia Letteraria in 1956 and the Second State Prize for 1969. His work has been translated 
into many languages. He died in Athens on 1979 from a heart attack. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Κρίτων Αθανασούλης γεννήθηκε στην Τρίπολη Αρκαδίας. Παρακολούθησε μαθήματα στη 
Νομική Σχολή του Πανεπιστημίου στην Αθήνα (διέκοψε τις σπουδές του στο τρίτο έτος). Η 
ποιητική πορεία του Αθανασούλη ξεκίνησε από το χώρο του λυρικού και κοινωνικού λόγου 
και οδηγήθηκε σταδιακά στην υπαρξιακή αγωνία και τον εσωτερικό λόγο. Εξέδωσε είκοσι 

ένα βιβλία ποίησης ενώ ασχολήθηκε επίσης με το κριτικό δοκίμιο και το θέατρο. Κέρδισε το 
πρώτο Διεθνές βραβείο  σε διαγωνισμό λογοτεχνίας που διεξήχθη από το ιταλικό περιοδικό 

Batalia Letteraria to 1956 και το δεύτερο Κρατικό Βραβείο το 1969.Έργα του 
μεταφράστηκαν σε πολλές ξένες γλώσσες. Πέθανε από καρδιακή ανακοπή.

 
 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    114                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Saint Thomas 

(1957) 

 

Άγιος Θωμάς 

(1957) 

 
I have never, never deceived anyone 

so that truth turned pale          
and my escape became impossible. 

I saw St Thomas before me and rejoice 
that I have seen him. I had gone out 
to buy some cigarettes at the kiosk. 

It was dusk. The clouds had descended 
to the asphalt and amongst them I saw 

St Thomas with none of that glitter 
which adorns hallucinations: I saw him plain, 

incarnate in the street's desolation. 
The saint was coming right at me. 

Just as one who, ceaselessly thinking 
of some beloved person, turns a corner 

and suddenly sees him there, thus 
did I also confront the saint before me. 
I recognized him as I brought to mind 

at that moment the wall painting 
of a Byzantine cathedral. He was very 

old, sorrowful, and tormented, 
almost in rags, with a beard 

and eyebrows almost meeting, with sad eyes. 
He did not tell me he was St Thomas, 

but who could doubt it was he 
since on one of his fingers there still remained 

telltale clots of blood? Who could doubt it? 
What a rare moment, to find myself before him! 

I stared and stared, until he stopped. 
Neither of us spoke for a long time, but I, 
a bit hurriedly, for fear of losing him, said: 

"St Thomas, today I am somewhat arrogant 

 

 
Δε γέλασα ποτέ ποτέ κανένα 

 έτσι πού ή αλήθεια να χλωμιάσε 
 κι αδύνατη να γίνει ή διαφυγή μου.  
Τον Άγιο Θωμά τον είδα μπρος μου 
και χαίρω πού τον είδα. Βγήκα έξω,  
τσιγάρα από το κιόσκι ν' αγοράσω.  

Σούρουπο ήταν. Τα νέφη είχαν κατέβη  
στην άσφαλτο κι ανάμεσα τους είδα  
τον 'Aγιο Θωμά δίχως μια λάμψη  

πού ντύνει την παραίσθηση, έτσι ακέριο, 
 ενσώματο στην ερημιά του δρόμου. 
Ερχόταν κατεπάνω μου o Άγιος. 

 Κι όπως ένας πού σκέφτεται αδιάκοπα 
 αγαπημένο πρόσωπο και ξάφνου,  

τη γωνιά στρίβοντας, το συντυχαίνει, έτσι 
 κι εγώ τον σύντυχα μπροστά μου. 

 Τον γνώρισα όπως την τοιχογραφία 
 στο νου μου έφερα την ώρα εκείνη βυζαντινής 
μητρόπολης. Ήταν γέρος πολύ, θλιμμένος και 

βασανισμένος, σχεδόν ρακένδυτος, με γένια και με 
φρύδια, σμιχτά, μάτια θλιμμένα.  
Είμαι ο Άγιος Θωμάς δε μου 'πε,  
αλλά ποιος αμφιβάλλει πώς αυτός  
ήταν άφου στο 'να του δάχτυλο  

είχε μείνει αίμα πηχτό; Ποιος αμφιβάλλει;  
Μοναδική ή στιγμή να 'μαι μπροστά του. Τον κοίταζα 
πολύ και κείνος στάθη. Κι οι δυο μας δε μιλούσαμε, μα 

'γώ βιάστηκα λίγο μη τον χάσω. 
- Άγιε Θωμά, είμαι αγέρωχος απόψε, 

 γιατί νίκησα μέσα μου το θάνατο  
το θάνατο πατήσας κι είμαι τώρα έξω  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    115                            

 

  

because within me I have conquered death 
by trampling on death, and now I've come out 

to find and buy some cigarettes. 
St Thomas, I have risen from the dead, and here I am 

He made a slight unconscious movement, 
looking at his blood-stained finger, ready 

to lean against me. A slight movement only, 
purely out of habit, but he stopped it. 

Then I saw that his disbelief, though still 
hesitant, was engrained, enfleshed. 

"I've been resurrected," I told him, "I've tamed 
the world, I've raised my head high, I've said 'No!' 

many times. Look at my wounds. 
See the spit on my face, what better 

token could you want? Look at my pierced 
side. Here is the flushed cheek 

I turned. I've shared my possessions 
and truly borne the weight of murder. 
St Thomas, those were difficult days." 

"Nations are at war," he said. "Go ahead, die. 
All nations tell lies. Cry out the truth. 

If you want to be resurrected, die first." 
"My brother died. They crucified him. 

It's always the same, the world suffers, 
a captive of its own passions, it's always the same. 

There isn't time enough for the boy 
to grow into manhood, for the girl to mature, 

for a man to take joy in his liberty. 
It's always the same. Because it's a fearful death 

to look upon death. It's always the same. 
St Thomas, I have died many times." 

Then suddenly he disappeared. The clouds ripped apart 
like a bedsheet, and he vanished among them. 

After that in the night I have sought to find 
wounds on my body. I have seen much blood. 
Haven't I been resurrected, therefore? I dipped 

my finger in my wounds. Oh yes, they exist. 
But the saint had vanished. He had not deigned 

να βρω τσιγάρα ν' αγοράσω.. Άγιε Θωμά, 
 αναστήθηκα και να 'μαι. Εκείνος έκαμε μια κίνηση 

ασυναίσθητα κοιτώντας το βαμμένο δάχτυλο, σε μένα 
έτοιμος ν' ακουμπήσει. Κίνηση μονάχα.  
Όμως τ' απόσυρε. Ήταν μια συνήθεια.  

Τότες είδα την απιστία του πάλι 
 δισταχτική, μα βέβαιη, σαρκωμένη. 

-Αναστήθηκα, του 'πα. Μέρωσα τον κόσμο. 
 Σήκωσα το κεφάλι, είπα τ' όχι πολλές φορές· Κοίταξε 
τις πληγές μου. Να ο εμπτυσμός στο πρόσωπο μου, 

δείγμα καλύτερο τι θέλεις; Να ή κεντημένη πλευρά μου. 
Να το μάγουλο μου κατέρυθρο, πού έστρεψα. Το κέρδος 
μοίρασα και το φθόνο σήκωσα στ' αλήθεια. Άγιε Θωμά, 

σκληρές ήταν οι μέρες. 
- Τα έθνη μάχονται, είπε. Σύρε να πεθάνεις. Τα έθνη 

ψεύδονται. Κράξε την αλήθεια. 
"Αν θες ν' αναστηθείς, πέθανε πρώτα. 

- Πέθανε ο αδελφός μου, τον σταύρωσαν, το ίδιο είναι, 
ο κόσμος υποφέρει αιχμάλωτος στα πάθη του, το ίδιο 
είναι. Το παιδί διόλου δεν προφταίνει άντρας να γίνει, 

 ή κόρη να ωριμάσει κι ο άντρας να χαρεί τη  
λευτεριά του. Το ίδιο είναι. Τι είναι σκληρός θάνατος, 

 το θάνατο να βλέπεις. Το ίδιο είναι, 
Άγιε Θωμά, πολύ έχω πεθάνει... Κι έφυγε ξαφνικά.  
Τα νέφη σπάσαν ωσάν σεντόνι κι έφυγε από μέσα.  

Και τότε μες στη νύχτα ψάχνω να 'βρω πληγές μες στο 
κορμί μου. Είδα αίμα. Δεν αναστήθηκα λοιπόν;  

Το δάχτυλο μου βύθισα στις πληγές.  
"Ω, αυτές υπάρχουν. Όμως ο Άγιος έφυγε.  
Ούτε κατεδέχθη ν' αγγίσει τις πληγές.  

Φώναξε μόνο: 
- Πληγώσου κι άλλο, γιατί αυτό δε φτάνει. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    116                            

 

  

to touch my wounds. He had only shouted: 
"Go get more wounds. Yours are not enough." 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    117                            

 

  

[Index] 

Alexandrou Ares (1922 - 1978) 
 

 
 

 

Ares Alexandrou (Aristotle Vasiliadhis) was born on 1922 and died in Paris on 1978. 
His father was a Greek from the Pontus and his mother a Russian of Esthonian origin. In 
youth he joined the communist student movement and took an active part in the resistance 
during the german Occupation until 1942, when he resigned, in disillusionment, from any 
political affiliation. During the Civil War, he spent about eight and a half years in various 
detention camps In addition to publishing five books of poetry, he has also published a novel, 
a dramatic monologue, and two scenarios. His poems have been translated into English and 
Italian. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Άρης Αλεξάνδρου (Αριστοτέλης Βασιλειάδης το πραγματικό του όνομα) γεννήθηκε 
το 1922 από πατέρα Έλληνα του Πόντου και μητέρα Ρωσίδα εσθονικής καταγωγής. Στα 
χρόνια της νιότης του εντάχθηκε στο κομμουνιστικό φοιτητικό κίνημα και έλαβε ενεργό 
μέρος στην Αντίσταση κατά τη διάρκεια της Κατοχής, μέχρι το 1942 οπότε και παραιτήθηκε 
απογοητευμένος από κάθε πολιτικό συσχετισμό.  Κατά τη διάρκεια του Εμφυλίου πέρασε 
οκτώμισι χρόνια σε διάφορα στρατόπεδα συγκέντρωσης. Πέθανε στο Παρίσι το 1978. Εκτός 
από τα πέντε βιβλία ποίηης έχει εκδόσει και μια νουβέλα, έναν δραματικό μονόλογο και δύο 
σενάρια. Τα ποιήματά του έχουν μεταφραστεί στα Αγγλικά και τα Ιταλικά. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    118                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The knife 

(1954-58) 

 

Το  μαχαίρι 

(1954-58) 
 

It takes as much time for steel to 
 become a sharp and useful knife as  
for words to be honed into speech. 
In the meantime, as long as you're 

 working the whetstone take 
 care not to be led astray or become 
 arrogant by the brilliant  sequence  

of sparks. Your goal is the knife. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 
Όπως αργεί τ' ατσάλι να γίνει κοφτερό 

 και χρήσιμο μαχαίρι έτσι αργούν  
κι οι λέξεις ν' ακονιστούν σε λόγο.  

Στο μεταξύ όσο δουλεύεις στον τροχό  
πρόσεχε μην παρασυρθείς μην ξιπαστείς 
άπ' τη λαμπρή αλληλουχία των σπινθήρων. 

 Σκοπός σου εσένα το μαχαίρι. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    119                            

 

  

[Index] 

Anagnostakis Manolis (1925 - 2006) 
 

 
 

 

Anagnostakis Manolis was born in 1925 in Thessaloniki and died in 2006. He studied 
medicine at the University of Thessaloniki. He took his degree in radiology at the University 
of Vienna. During the Greek civil war and same years after (1948-51), he was incarcerated for 
his left-wing activities and he has been condemned in death but the punishment never took 
place. His poetry has been influenced by his political ideas. The basic themes of his poems are 
the struggle for freedom and justice. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Μανώλης Αναγνωστάκης γεννήθηκε το 1925 στη Θεσσαλονίκη και απεβίωσε το 
2006. Σπούδασε ιατρική στο Πανεπιστήμιο Θεσσαλονίκης και πήρε πτυχίο ραδιολογίας από 
το Πανεπιστήμιο της Βιέννης. Κατά τη διάρκεια του Εμφυλίου και τα επόμενα χρόνια 
διώχθηκε για τις αριστερές του πεποιθήσεις και είχε καταδικαστεί σε θάνατο, αλλά η ποινή 
ποτέ δεν εκτελέστηκε. Η ποίηση του είναι επηρρεασμένη από τις πολιτικές του ιδέες. Η 
βασική θεματολογία των ποιημάτων του περιλαμβάνει τον αγώνας για ελευθερία και 
δικαιοσύνη. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    120                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

13-12-43 

(1945) 

 

13-12-43 

(1945) 
 

Remember me telling you: when the boats  
whistle don’t be in the port. But the day that 

 was leaving was ours and we didn’t want to ever 
 let it go A bitter handkerchief will greet the  

tedium of return. It really was raining a lot and the  
streets were deserted With a delicate, vaguely autumnal 

 flavor Closed windows and people so forgotten  
Why did they all leave us? Why did they all leave us?  

I was clasping your hands And there was 
 nothing strange in my cry.  

. . . One day we’ll leave noiselessly and we’ll roam  
Through roaring towns and over desolate seas  

With but one desire burning on our lips  
It is love that we sought and they denied it to us  

You forgot about our tears, our joys and our memories  
Greeting while sails rippling in the wind  

And maybe there’s nothing else left for us to remember.  
The anguished Why heaves up in my soul  
I suck in the air of loneliness and desertion  
I knock on the walls of my damp prison and 
 I don’t expect an answer No one will ever 

 touch the extent of my affection and sadness.  
And you’re waiting for a letter which doesn’t come  

A far-off voice revolves in your memory and fades away  
While a mirror gloomily measures your face  

Our lost ignorance, our lost wings. 

 
Translated by: Philip Ramp 

 

 
Θυμάσαι που σου 'λεγα: Όταν σφυρίζουν τα 

 Πλοία μην είσαι στο λιμάνι. Μα η μέρα που έφευγε 
 ήτανε δικιά μας και δε θα θέλαμε ποτέ να την αφήσουμε 
Ενα μαντήλι πικρό θα χαιρετά την ανία του γυρισμού 

 Κι έβρεχε αλήθεια πολύ κι ήτανε έρημοι οι δρόμοι  
Με μια λεπτήν ακαθόριστη χινοπωριάτικη γεύση  

Κλεισμένα παράθυρα κι οι άνθρωποι τόσο 
λησμονημένοι Γιατί μας άφησαν όλοι; Γιατί μας άφησαν 

όλοι;  
Κι έσφιγγα, τα χέρια σου Δεν είχε τίποτα  

τ' αλλόκοτο η κραυγή μου. 
. . . Θα φύγουμε κάποτε αθόρυβα και θα πλανηθούμε 
Μες στις πολύβοες πολιτείες και στις έρημες θάλασσες 

 Με μιαν επιθυμία φλογισμένη στα χείλη μας Είναι η 
αγάπη που γυρέψαμε και μας την αρνήθηκαν  

Ξεχνούσες τα δάκρυα, τη χαρά και τη μνήμη μας 
Χαιρετώντας λευκά πανιά π' ανεμίζονται. 

 Ισως δε μένει τίποτ' άλλο παρά αυτό να θυμόμαστε. 
Μες στην ψυχή μου σκιρτά το εναγώνιο Γιατί,  

Ρουφώ τον αγέρα της μοναξιάς και της εγκατάλειψης 
 Χτυπώ τους τοίχους της υγρής φυλακής μου και 
δεν προσμένω απάντηση Κανείς δε θ' αγγίξει την  

έκταση της στοργής και της θλίψης μου. 
Κι εσύ περιμένεις ένα γράμμα που δεν έρχεται  

Μια μακρινή φωνή γυρνά στη μνήμη σου και σβήνει Κι 
ένας καθρέφτης μετρά σκυθρωπός τη μορφή σου  

Τη χαμένη μας άγνοια, τα χαμένα φτερά 

 

 

[Index]   [Greek Poets]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    121                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Chess 

(1954) 

 

Σκάκι 

(1954) 
 

Come, let's play chess. I shall give you my queen 
(She was once my beloved But now I have no beloved) 
I shall concede my castles(Now I no longer shoot at my  

Friends They have died a long time before me) 
And this King was never mine And then, what need 
 have I of many soldiers? (They march ahead, blind, 

 without even dreams)I shall give you all, even my knights 
I shall keep only this crazy fool of mine Who knows  

how to advance on one color onlyStriding from one corner to 
the other Laughing at all your many panoplies Thrusting 

 his way suddenly into your lines Throwing your solid 
 battle array into confusion. 

Translated by: Kimon Friar 

 

 
Έλα να παίξουμε. Θα σου χαρίσω τη βασίλισσα μου. 
(Ήταν για μένα μια φορά η αγαπημένη Τώρα δεν έχω 
πια αγαπημένη) Θα σου χαρίσω τους πύργους μου 
(Τώρα πια δεν πυροβολώ τους φίλους μου Έχουν 

πεθάνει καιρό πριν από μένα) Κι ο βασιλιάς αυτός δεν 
ήτανε ποτέ δικός μου. Κι ύστερα, τόσους στρατιώτες τι 
τους θέλω; (Τραβάνε εμπρός τυφλοί χωρίς καν όνειρα) 
Όλα, και τ' άλογα μου θα σ' τα δώσω Μονάχα ετούτο 

τον τρελό μου θα κρατήσω που ξέρει μόνο σ' ένα χρώμα 
να πηγαίνει δρασκελώντας τη μια άκρη ως την άλλη 

Γελώντας μπρος στις τόσες πανοπλίες σου Μπαίνοντας 
μέσα στις γραμμές σου ξαφνικά Αναστατώνοντας τις 
στερεές παρατάξεις. Κι αυτή δεν έχει τέλος η παρτίδα. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    122                            

 

  

[Index] 

Antoniou Takis (1932 - 2006) 
 

 
 

 

Antoniou Takis was born in 1932 in Agrinio, Greece where he finished highschool. 
He studied Theology in the University of Athens and took his postgraduate studies on 
Philosophy and Philology from the University of Munich. His work has been translated in 
many languages whereas music plays have been presented based on his creations, such as the 
byzantine music drama based on the poem “The Revolution of the Dead”. Antoniou Takis 
died in 2006. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Τάκης Αντωνίου γεννήθηκε στις 5 Μαρτίου 1932 στο Αγρίνιο όπου τελείωσε και το 
γυμνάσιο. Σπούδασε Θεολογία στο Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών και συνέχισε μεταπτυχιακά για 

πέντε χρόνια τις σπουδές του στη Φιλοσοφική Σχολή του Πανεπιστημίου του Μονάχου στα 
τμήματα της Φιλοσοφίας και βυζαντινής και νεοελληνικής Φιλολογίας. Έργα του και 
ποιήματά του μεταφράστηκαν και δημοσιεύτηκαν στα αγγλικά, γερμανικά, πολωνικά, 

σουηδικά, γαλλικά, ολλανδικά, ιταλικά, ρουμανικά και ισπανικά, ενώ για πολλά από τα έργα 
του έχουν γραφτεί και ανεβεί μουσικά έργα, όπως το βυζαντινό μουσικό δράμα που βασίζεται 

στο ποίημά του η "Επανάσταση των νεκρών". Απεβίωσε το 2006. 

 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    123                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The revolution of the Deads 

 (extract) 

 

Επανάσταση των Νεκρών 
(απόσπασμα) 

 
I believe in one absurd living almighty father of 

 terror, maker of God and of all invisible shadows. 
Light from the sun's light and darkness from the  
night's glooma true God,plaything of coincidence 

consubstantial to the earth from which all was 
 made. I long for my broken fingers to hold 

a minimum branch of an olive treein the  
present of endless time. 

 

Translated by: Byron Raizis 

 

 
Εγώ πιστεύω σ' ένα παράλογο ζωντανό παντοκράτορα 
πατέρα του τρόμου, ποιητή του Θεού και πάντων των 

αοράτων σκιών. Φως άπ ' του ήλιου το φως 
και σκότος άπ' το ζόφο της νύχτας Θεό αληθινό, 
παιχνίδι της σύμπτωσης ομοούσιο της γης 

δι' ης τα πάντα εγένετο."Ενα κλαρί ελάχιστο ελιάς 
λαχταρώ να κρατούν τα σπασμένα μου δάκτυλα στο 

παρόν του αιώνος χρόνου. 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    124                            

 

  

[Index] 

Avyeris Markos (1884 - 1973) 
 

 
 

 
Avyeris Markos was born on 1884 in Ioannina and died in Athens in 1973. He studied 

medicine at the University of Athens. In addition to his poetry he has written many essays and 
he has contributed with many literary magazines. 

 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Μάρκος Αυγέρης γεννήθηκε το 1884 στα Ιωάννινα και πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 

1973. Σπούδασε ιατρική στο Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών. Πέραν της ποίησης του έχει γράψει 
πολλά δοκίμια και κείμενα για αρκετά λογοτεχνικά περιοδικά. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    125                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

I proclaim good news 

 

Ευαγγελίζομαι 
 

I come from the wind and march with the wind  
My whole soul rejoices and goes into the violent 
 wind. I am the Great Catalyst,breath of Zeus,  

lord of the heights. He smoothens the sharp edges 
of the rocks and demolishes the dynasties of old  
uplifting the great roads and scattering the clouds  
in the heavenly seas. My soul rejoices in this storm  

as a fountain dances in the sun. There have  
I stored all my hopes and my capital. I hear the cry 

 from tomorrow that carries away the present, 
fells the old trees and sweeps away the other  

world's leaves. It will cleanse the fumes and will  
recycle the marshes for the big rivers to flow free. 

The time of the sun has now come and it will descend  
and the prairies will bloom and the mountains will  

turn green. I proclaim the wind and preach the wind, 
the drunken wind from the east that brings the new  
sun. It is the budding-wind that makes the forests  
bloom. I hear the wind that comes from the peaks 

and the valleys and the seas. I preach the universal  
wind of regeneration I announce the wind that 

 rekindles the flames, within which the bird of fire sings. 
I preach the wind of the new GENESIS. 

 

Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis 

 

 
Έρχομαι από τον άνεμο και πορεύομαι με τον άνεμο  
Όλη ή ψυχή μου χαίρεται και πάει μέσα στο σφοδρόν 
άνεμο. Είναι ο Μέγας Κατεβάτης, πνοή του Δία του 
άρχοντα των υψωμάτων. Λειαίνει αυτός τις τραχείες 

εξοχές των βράχων και γκρεμίζει τις παλιές δυναστείες 
ξεσηκώνοντας τους μεγάλους δρόμους και σκορπώντας 

τα σύννεφα στις ουράνιες θάλασσες. 
Μέσα σ' αυτή τη θύελλα χαίρεται ή ψυχή μου όπως 
χορεύει ο πίδακας στον ήλιο. Εκεί έχω αποθέσει  
όλες μου τις ελπίδες και τα κεφάλαια μου. Ακούω  
την κραυγή από το αύριο πού συνεπαίρνει το  
σήμερα, ρίχνει τα γέρικα δέντρα και σαρώνει τα 

 φύλλα του άλλου κόσμου. Θα καθαρίσει τις  
αναθυμιάσεις και θ' ανακυκλίσει τα τέλματα για  

να τρέξουν ελεύθερα τα μεγάλα ποτάμια. Είναι  τώρα 
του ήλιου ο καιρός πού θα κατέβει και 

 θ' ανθίσουν οι πεδιάδες και θα πρασινίσουν  
τα βουνά. Τον άνεμο ευαγγελίζομαι και κηρύχνω  
τον άνεμο, το μεθυσμένον άνεμο της ανατολής  

πού φέρνει τον καινούργιον ήλιο. Είναι ο 
φουσκοδέντρης πού κάνει ν' ανθίζουν οι δρυμώνες. 

Ακούω τον άνεμο πού έρχεται από τις κορφές από τους 
κάμπους κι από τις θάλασσες. Κηρύχνω τον καθολικόν 
άνεμο της παλιγγενεσίας αναγγέλλω τον άνεμο πού 
ξανάβει τις πυρκαγιές, πού μέσα τους τραγουδάει το 

πουλί της φωτιάς. Κηρύχνω τον άνεμο της νέας 
ΓΕΝΕΣΕΩΣ. 

 

 

 

[Index]   [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    126                            

 

  

[Index] 

Vakalo Eleni (1921 - 2001) 
 

 
 

 
Eleni Vakalo was born on 1921 in Athens, where she completed her early education. 

She received her degree in archeology from the University of Athens in 1944, then studied the 
History of Art at the Sorhonne, and published seven books and many articles on art in various 
periodicals. In collaboration with her husband and a group of painters and art editors, the 
"Vakalo School of Decorative Arts" was founded in 1958, where she teaches the History of 
Art. In 1959, she went to Italy to visit its museums; in 1956 she toured the United States on 
the invitation of the Department of State.  

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Η Ελένη Βακαλώ γεννήθηκε στην Αθήνα το 1921. Πήρε πτυχίο στην Αρχαιολογία 

από το Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών το 1944 και στη συνέχεια σπούδασε Ιστορία της Τέχνης στη 
Σορβόννη. Έχει εκδόσει βιβλία και γράψει άρθρα σε διάφορα περιοδικά. Σε συνεργασία με 
τον σύζυγό της και μια ομάδα ζωγράφων και εκδοτών τέχνης, ίδρυσε το 1958 τη «Σχολή 
Καλών Τεχνών Βακαλώ» όπου δίδασκε Ιστορία της Τέχνης. Απεβίωσε το 2001. 
. 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    127                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The house 

(1951) 

 

Το σπίτι 

(1951) 
 

I. House Warming 
When the building was finished the architect flung a wooden 
bridge from one wall to another like those that ships throw 
down when they dock or when they leave and you always 

fear you will fall. He hung it from the rafters with thick chains 
and a large link in each corner and said to us: "This is where 
you will live." The others stood at the edge of the wharf and 

gave me each thing as it came 
The clock I hung on the wall 

Tick tock 
The mirror I nailed on the wall 

Tick tock 
The icon I smashed 

Tick tock 
And wept 

The table I spread 
With a linen tablecloth 

Then I closed the door and lit a fire 
I tried to learn walking on the bridge without crawling on all 

fours, without clinging to the rails and without breaking 
anything so that the children would not be afraid. At night 

 when they were asleep I would open the window and  
look at the harbor lights. 

 
II. The Lake 

There were some things in the house I never touched. There 
was a lake which I had to encircle every time I wanted to 
cross to the opposite side. If ever I leant over it, it would 

drag me down. 
The angel said 

Do not look at the city of Zion 
Then I began to sing loudly that I might not be afraid when I 

 
Το σπίτι Ι 

"Οταν τελείωσε το χτίσιμο του σπιτιού ο αρχιτέκτονας 
έβαλε μια γέφυρα ξύλινη από τον ένα τοίχο στον άλλο 
σαν αυτές πού ρίχνουν τα πλοία σαν έρχονται ή σα 
φεύγουν και φοβάσαι πάντα μην πέσεις. Την κρέμασε 
άπ' τα δοκάρια του ταβανιοΰ με αλυσίδες χοντρές και 
έναν κρίκο μεγάλο στην κάθε γωνιά και μας είπε «Εδώ 

θα ζείτε». 
Οι άλλοι στέκονταν στην άκρη της αποβάθρας και μου 

δίνανε το κάθε πράμα με τη σειρά. 
Το ρολόι το κρέμασα στον τοίχο 

Τικ τακ 
Τον καθρέφτη τον κάρφωσα στον τοίχο 

Τικ τακ 
Την εικόνα την έσπασα 

Κι έκλαψα 
Το τραπέζι το έστρωσα 
Με τραπεζομάντιλο λινό 

Ύστερα έκλεισα την πόρτα και άναψα φωτιά. 
Προσπάθησα να μάθω να περπατώ πάνω στη γέφυρα 
χωρίς να σκύβω με τα τέσσερα χωρίς να κρατιέμαι από 

τα κάγκελα και χωρίς να κάνω ζημιές για να μη 
φοβώνται τα παιδιά. Το βράδυ όταν κοιμότανε άνοιγα 

το παράθυρο και κοίταζα τα φώτα του λι μανιού. 
 

II . Το σπίτι ΙΙ 
Στο σπίτι μέσα είχε κάτι πράματα πού δεν τα άγγιζα 
ποτέ. Ήταν μια λίμνη πού έπρεπε να κάνω τον κύκλο 
της για να περάσω άπ' την άλλη μεριά. Σαν έσκυβα θα 

με τραβούσε στο βυθό. 
Ό άγγελος είπε 

Να μη κοιτάξετε την πόλη της Σιών. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    128                            

 

  

remained alone and that the barrier might not anywhere 
crack. All day long I gathered the fishes that leapt out of the 
water, tied them in small bunches and hung them carefully 
on the walls because I had to guard the house from evil. 
When the others returned toward nightfall, I said nothing 

because then the waters never rose. Indeed I liked to look at 
them because they were quiet and knew nothing.  

Only my husband threw me a glance now and then. 
 

III. The End of the House 
One day my eldest son said 

“I shall not return home tonight” 
I put the children to bed 

And then I think I looked at our house 
For the first timeIt was old 

 
And in winter would leak with the rains 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

Τότε άρχισα να τραγουδώ δυνατά για να μη φοβάμαι 
όταν 

έμενα μόνη μου και να μην τύχει και ραγίσει το φράγμα 
πουθενά.Όλη τη μέρα μάζευα τα ψάρια πού πηδούσαν 

άπ' το νερό τα έδενασε μικρές αρμαθιές, και τα 
κρεμούσα στον τοίχο προσεχτικά γιατίέπρεπε να 
φυλάξω το σπίτι μας άπ' το κακό. Το βράδυ όταν 

γυρνούσαν οι άλλοι δεν έλεγα τίποτα γιατί τότε πια δεν 
ανεβαίνουνε τα νερά. Μου άρεσε μάλιστα να τους 

κοιτάω πού ήταν ήσυχοι και δεν ήξεραν. Μόνο ο άντρας 
μου με κοίταζε καμιά φορά. 

 
III. Το τέλος του σπιτιού 

Μια μέρα ο μεγάλος μου γιος είπε ο βράδυ  
“δε θα γυρίσω σπίτι νωρίς” 

Έβαλα τα μικρά να κοιμηθούνε Και τότε θαρρώ πώς 
κοίταξα το σπίτι μας Για πρώτη φορά 

 
Ήταν παλιό και το χειμώνα θα έσταζε με τις βροχές 

. 
 

 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    129                            

 

  

[Index] 

Varnalis Kostas (1884 - 1974) 
 

 
 

 
Kostas (Konstandinos) Varnalis was born on 1884 in Pirgos, Bulgaria, and died in 

Athens on 1974.  He came to Greece in 1903, took his degree classics and literature from the 
University of Athens in 1908, first taught high school in Bulgaria and Greece, became a 
director of secondary schools in various parts of Greece. Fired because of his left-wing 
activities, he lived as a journalist, free-lance writer, and translator. He has written two books 
on Greece's national poet Dhionysios Solomos.The Balkan Wars and the Asia Minor Disaster 
of 1922 awaked him towards political issues and caused him to turn more and more to 
Marxsism. From that point on, his poets were to become increasingly polemical, satirical, and 
propagandistic. 

 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Κώστας Βάρναλης γεννήθηκε το 1884 στον Πύργο Βουλγαρίας και πέθανε στην 

Αθήνα το 1974. Ήρθε στην Ελλάδα το 1903, όπου πήρε πτυχίο κλασσικών σπουδών και 
λογοτεχνίας από το Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών το 1908. Δίδαξε σε γυμνάσια σε Βουλγαρία και 
Ελλάδα. Απολύθηκε εξαιτίας των αριστερών του πεποιθήσεων οπότε και άρχισε να εργάζεται 
ως δημοσιογράφος, ανεξάρτητος συγγραφέας και μεταφραστής. Έχει γράψει δύο βιβλία για 
τον Εθνικό ποιητή της Ελλάδας, Διονύσιο Σολωμό. Οι Βαλκανικοί πόλεμοι και η 
καταστροφή της Μικράς Ασίας το 1922 αφύπνισαν το πολιτικό του αίσθημα και τον έκαναν 
να στραφεί περισσότερο προς τον Μαρξισμό. Από τότε τα ποιήματά απέκτησαν σταδιακά 
ύφος μαχητικό, σατιρικό και προπαγανδιστικό. 
. 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    130                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Orestes 

(1914) 

 

Ορέστης 

(1914) 
 

Celery your hair, as curly and as fragrant. Unbind it, 
 and reveal yourself to be as indeed you are, most 

handsome. Cast from your mind the onus of that fierce 
oracle, since there 

is nothing else you can ever do. Smile now to see how 
 your destined road has brought you here to the great 

 gates of Argos where you must soon extirpate the womb  
that gave you birth. No one remembers you here. Like them, 

you too must now forget just who you are, and go to the 
dark crossroads of that golden city do your work, as though 
you were another. No matter what you do, you'll be pursued 

by your own mother's blood, or by your shame. 
 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 
Σέλινα τα μαλλιά σου μυρωμένα, λύσε τα να φανείς, ως 
είσαι, ωραίος, και δίωξε από το νου σου πια το χρέος 
του μεγάλου χρησμού, μια και κανένα τρόπο δεν 
έχεις άλλονε! Και μ ' ένα χαμόγελον ιδές πώς σ ' 
εφερ ' έως στου Άργους την πύλη ο δρόμος σου ο 

μοιραίος το σπλάχνο ν ' αφανίσεις πού σ ' εγέννα. 
Κανείς δε σε θυματ' εδώ. Κι εσύ όμοια τον εαυτό σου 

ξέχανέ τον, κι  
Άμε στης χρυσής πολιτείας τα σταυροδρόμια και το  

έργο σου σα να 'ταν άλλος κάμε. Έτσι κι  
αλλιώς, θα παίρνει σε από πίσου για το αίμα  

της μητρός σου για ή ντροπή σου. 
. 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    131                            

 

  

[Index] 

Vafopoulos Yioryos (1903 - 1996) 
 

 
 

 
Yioryos Vafopoulos was born on 1903 in Gevgelija, now on the Yugoslavian side of 

the Greek-Yugoslavian border and died on 1996. In his early poems Vafopoulos struggled to 
find a unity which might bind the concepts of life and death into some coherent whole, and 
found this in the very nature of man himself who, through death, discovers that God dwells 
within him. 

 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Γιώργος Βαφόπουλος γεννήθηκε το 1903 στην Γιουγκοσλαβική πλευρά των 

Ελληνο-Γιουγκοσλαβικών συνόρων και πέθανε το 1996. Στα πρώτα του ποιήματα 
αγώνιστηκε να βρει μια ενότητα που θα μπορούσε να δέσει τις έννοιες της ζωής και του 
θανάτου σε ένα ενιαίο σύνολο. Την αναζήτησή του αυτή τη βρήκε στην ίδια τη φύση του 
ανθρώπου ο οποίος μέσα από το θάνατο, ανακαλύπτει το Θεό. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    132                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The floor 

(1951) 

 

Το δάπεδο 

(1951) 
 

Black and white tiles in alternating order suffer the  
touch of my footsteps. On this, my prescribed arena, 

I play like a child, taking care to step on the white  
surfaces only. Difficult exercise. Skillful acrobatics. 

Sometimes I lose the body's balance. 
Sometimes I lose the spirit's calculation. 

And then the order of my steps becomes confused, 
and my erring sole stumbles on the black tiles. 

I must start the game once more from the beginning. 
I must train my spirit to perfect balance. 

But my exhausted spirit starts over and over again,  
and swirls in a whirling vertigo. And now the motionless 
disk of the floor spins swiftly round and round and the 

alternating order of the colors becomes confused. 
Confusion of the senses! Then like a child whose  
game has been spoiled, then like a child whose 
 patience has been exhausted, I run spitefully 

and trample on the ordered system of the floor. 
With the soles of my feet I wipe out the lines that  

Separate the black and white tiles. And then I sprawl  
on the floor, with an over brimming spirit, and  

drench my broken faith with tears. Ah, how much this 
unrelenting exercise has fatigued me! But now at  

last I see clearly what the whirling of the floor signifies. 
Now I understand the meaning of the copulating colors. 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 
Άσπρα και μαύρα πλακάκια, σ' εναλλασσόμενη τάξη, 
την επαφή των βημάτων μου δέχονται. Στο διορισμένο 
μου δάπεδο τούτο παίζω σαν ένα παιδί, ροσπαθώντας 

μονάχα στις λευκές να πατώ επιφάνειες. 
Δύσκολη άσκηση, ακροβασία περίτεχνη. Κάποτε 
 χάνω του σώματος την ισορροπία. Κάποτε χάνω  

του πνεύματος τον υπολογισμό. Και μπερδεύεται τότε 
των βημάτων μου ή τάξη. Και πλανημένο το πέλμα μου, 

παραπατάει στα μαύρα πλακάκια. Πρέπει πάλι ν' 
αρχίσω άπ' την αρχή το παιχνίδι. Πρέπει ν' ασκήσω το 
πνεύμα μου στην τέλεια ακροβασία. Όμως, αρχίζοντας 
πάλι και πάλι, το αποσταμένο μου πνεύμα περιδινείται 
σε ίλιγγου στροβίλισμα. Και του δαπέδου ο ακίνητος 
δίσκος περιστρέφεται μ' ένταση. Και των χρωμάτων 
συγχέεται ή εναλλασσόμενη τάξη. Των αισθήσεων 
σύγχυση. Κι όπως ένα παιδί, πού του χαλούν το 

παιχνίδι, κι όπως ένα παιδί, 
πού ή υπομονή του εξαντλείται, τρέχω με πείσμα, 

τσαλαπατώντας του δαπέδου την τάξη. Με το πέλμα 
σκουπίζω τις γραμμές πού χωρίζουν τα λευκά  
και τα μαύρα πλακάκια. Και ξαπλώνομαι χάμου, 

με βουρκωμένο το πνεύμα μου. Και ραντίζω με δάκρυα 
τη συντριμμένη μου πίστη. Πόσο με κούρασε ή επίμονη 
άσκηση. Όμως τώρα πια βλέπω φανερά τι σημαίνει του 

δαπέδου το γύρισμα  Τώρα βλέπω το νόημα της 
συνουσίας των χρωμάτων. 

 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    133                            

 

  

[Index] 

Vretakos Nikiforos (1912 - 1991) 
 

 
 

 
Nikiphoros Vrettakos was born on 1911 in the town of Krokeas near Sparta and died 

on 1991. Moving to Athens in 1929, he studied for a year at the university there, but left to 
earn his living as a clerk in various small businesses until 1937 as a civil servant in he 
Ministry of Labour, as a customs official in Piraeus. Vrettakos is a pure singing voice, writing 
spontaneously without much attention to form, impelled by an almost native religious 
devotion and deep sentiment for the ills of downtrodden humanity.  

 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Νικηφόρος Βρεττάκος γεννήθηκε το 1911 στην Κροκέα, κοντά στη Σπάρτη και 

πέθανε το 1991. Μετακόμισε στην Αθήνα το 1929. Σπούδασε οτο Πανεπιστήμιο για έναν 
χρόνο μόνο καθώς αναγκάστηκε να κερδίσει τα προς το ζην ως υπάλληλος σε διάφορες 
μικρές επιχειρήσεις μέχρι το 1937 οπότε και διορίστηκε ως δημόσιος υπάλληλος στο 
Υπουργείο Εργασίας. Το ύφος του Βρεττάκου είναι αυθόρμητο, χωρίς ιδιαίτερη προσοχή στη 
δομή εξαιτίας της ευλαβικής προσήλωσης και βαθιάς συμπάθειας για τις πληγές της 
κατατρεγμένης και καταπιεσμένης ανθρωπότητας.  

 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    134                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 

Elegy on the tomb of a young warrior

(1947) 

 

Ελέγειο πάνω στον τάφο ενός 
μικρου αγωνιστή 

(1947) 
 

On this your ground we say our name. On this your 
 ground we draw the plans for our gardens and our 

cities. On this your ground We Are. We have a country. I 
have kept your bullet-shot within me. Within me wanders  

the poisonous burst of the machine gun. When I remember 
your exploding heart, certain hundred-petaled roses rise in  
my brain and resemble the conversation of the infinite with 
man. Thus did your heart speak to us. And we saw that the 

world is greater and has become greater that it might 
contain love. Your first toy: You Your first pony: You You 

played fire. You played Christ. You played Saint George and 
the bold Border Guard. You played the clock hands that 

descend from midnight down. You played the voice of hope 
when no voice existed. The Square was deserted. Our 

country had gone. It was time! Your heart could no longer 
endure to hear under your roof the human thunderbolts of 

Europe. Under your coat you lit the first thief s lantern. 
Hearts of hearts! You thought of the sun, and advanced. . . 

You mounted the pavement and played Man. 
 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 
Πάνω στο χώμα το δικό σου λέμε τ' ονομά μας. 

Πάνω στο χώμα το δικό σου σχεδιάζουμε τους κήπους 
και τις πολιτείς μας Πάνω στο χώμα σου είμαστε. 

Έχουμε πατρίδα. 'Εχω κρατήσει μέσα μου τη ντουφεκιά 
σου. Γυρίζει μέσα μου ο φαρμακερός ήχος του 

πολυβόλου. Θυμάμαι την καρδιά σου που άνοιξε, κ' 
έρχονται στο μυαλό μου κάτι εκατόφυλλα τριαντάφυλλα 

που μοιάζουνε  
σαν ομιλία του απείρου προς τον άνθρωπο -έτσι μας 
μίλησε η καρδιά σου. Κ' είδαμε πως ο κόσμος είναι 
μεγαλύτερος, κ' έγινε μεγαλύτερος για να χωρά η 

αγάπη. Tο πρώτο σου παιγνίδι: Εσύ. Το πρώτο σου 
αλογάκι: Εσύ. 'Επαιξες τη φωτιά. Έπαιξες το Χριστό. 

'Επαιξες 
 τον Αη-Γιώργη και το Διγενή. 'Επαιξες τους δείκτες του 
ρολογιού που κατεβαίνουνε απ' τα μεσάνυχτα. 'Επαιξες 
τη φωνή της ελπίδας, εκεί που δεν υπήρχε φωνή. Η 
πλατεία ήταν έρημη. Η πατρίδα είχε φύγει. 'Ηταν  
 καιρός! Δε βάσταξε η καρδιά σου περισσότερο 
ν' ακούς κάτω απ' τη στέγη σου τ' ανθρώπινα 

μπουμπουνιτά της Ευρώπης! 'Αναψες κάτω απ' το 
σακκάκι σου το πρώτο κλεφτοφάναρο... Kαρδιά των 
καρδιών! Σκέφτηκες τον ήλιο, και προχώρησες... 
Ανέβηκες στο πεζοδρόμιο κ' έπαιξες τον άνθρωπο! 

 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    135                            

 

  

 [Index] 

Gatsos Nikos (1911 - 1992) 
 

 
 

 
Nikos (Nikolaos) Gatsos was born on 1911 in the village of Chania, Arcadia, but 

moved with his family to Athens when he was sixteen. He died on 1992 in Athens. He 
majored in classics, philosophy and history at the University of Athens, spent eight months in 
Paris and southern France, but has lived the rest of his life in Greece. He has made a grεat 
popular reputation as the writer of lyrics set to music by such popular composers as Mikis 
Theodhorakis, Manos Hadzidhakis, and Stavros Xarhakos. He is the author primar¬ily of only 
one poem Amorgos but it has had a disproportionately strong influence on the writers of his 
generation. Here the practice of surrealism, the rhythms of the Bible, and the traditions of 
Greek folk ballads are combined in a strange, arresting, and elegiac manner. Profoundly 
influenced by the Ionian. 

 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Νίκος Γκάτσος γεννήθηκε το 1911 στην Αρκαδία. Στα δεκαέξι του χρόνια 

μετακόμισε με την οικογένειά του στην Αθήνα. Πήρε πτυχίο Κλασικών Σπουδών, 
Φιλοσοφίας και Ιστορίας από το Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών. Έμεινε οκτώ μήνες στο Παρίσι και 
τη νότια Γαλλία αλλά πέρασε το υπόλοιπο της ζωής του στην Ελλάδα. Είναι φημισμένος ως ο 
ποιητής που έχουν μελοποιήσει διάσημοι συνθέτες όπωε ο Μίκης Θεοδωράκης, ο Μάνος 
Χατζιδάκης και ο Σταύρος Ξαρχάκος. Το ποίημά του «Αμοργός» έιχε μεγάλη επιρροή στους 
συγγραφείς της γενιάς του, καθώς συνδυάζει το σουρεαλισμό, ύμνους από τη Βίβλο και 
στοιχεία παραδοσιακών ελληνικών τραγουδιών με έναν περίεργο και ελεγειακό τρόπο.Ο 
Γκάτσος απεβίωσε το 1992 στην Αθήνα. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    136                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Amorgos 

(1941-42) 

 

Αμοργός 

(1941-42) 
 
I 

With their country tied to their sails and their oars hung on 
thewind The shipwrecked slept tamely like dead beasts on a 
bedding of sponges But the eyes of seaweed are turned 

toward the sea Hoping the South Wind will bring them back 
with their lateen sails newly painted For one lost elephant is 
always worth much more than the two quivering breasts of a 
girl Only if the roofs of deserted chapels should light up  
with thecaprice of the Evening Star Only if birds should 

ripple amid the masts of the lemon trees With the firm white 
flurry of lively footsteps Will the winds come, the bodies of 
swans that remained immaculate, unmoving and tender 

Amid the streamrollers of shops and the cyclones of 
vegetable 

gardens When the eyes of women turned to coal and the 
hearts of the chestnut hawkers were broken When the 

harvest was done and the hopes of crickets began. 
And indeed this is why, my brave young men, with kisses, 

wine, and leaves on your mouths I would want you to 
stride naked along the riversidesTo sing of the Barbary 

Coast like a woodsman hunting the mastic shrubs Like a 
viper slithering through gardens of barley With the spirited 

eyes of pride  
Like a lightning bolt as it threshes youth. And do not laugh 

and do not weep and do not rejoice And do not tighten your 
shoes in vain as though you were planting plane trees Do 

not become DESTINY For the imperial eagle is not a closed 
drawer It is not a tear of the plum tree nor a smile of the 

water lily Nor the undershirt of a dove nor a Sultan's 
mandolin Nor a silken garment for the head of a whale It is a 
saw of the sea that rips the seagulls apart It is a carpenter's 

pillow a beggar's watch It is a fire in a blacksmith's shop 

 

Ι 
Mε την πατρίδα τους δεμένη στα πανιά και τα κουπιά 
στον άνεμο κρεμασμένα Oι ναυαγοί κοιμήθηκαν ήμεροι 

σαν αγρίμια νεκρά μέσα στων σφουγγαριών τα 
σεντόνια  

Aλλά τα μάτια των φυκιών είναι στραμένα στη θάλασσα 
Mήπως τους ξαναφέρει ο νοτιάς με τα φρεσκοβαμένα 
λατίνια Kι ένας χαμένος ελέφαντας αξίζει πάντοτε πιο 
πολύ από δυο στήθια κοριτσιού που σαλεύουν Mόνο ν' 
ανάψουνε στα βουνά οι στέγες των ερημοκκλησιών με 
το μεράκι του αποσπερίτη Nα κυματίσουνε τα πουλιά 

στης λεμονιάς τα κατάρτια Mε της καινούργιας 
περπατησιάς το σταθερό άσπρο φύσημα Kαι τότε θά 
'ρθουν αέρηδες σώματα κύκνων που μείνανε άσπιλοι 
τρυφεροί και ακίνητοι Mες στους οδοστρωτήρες των 
μαγαζιών μέσα στων λαχανόκηπων τους κυκλώνες  
Όταν τα μάτια των γυναικών γίναν κάρβουνα κι 

έσπασαν οι καρδιές των καστανάδων Όταν ο θερισμός 
εσταμάτησε κι άρχισαν οι ελπίδες των γρύλων.  Γι' αυτό 
λοιπόν κι εσείς παλληκάρια μου με το κρασί τα φιλιά 

και τα φύλλα στο στόμα σας  Θέλω να βγείτε γυμνοί στα 
ποτάμια Nα τραγουδήστε τη μπαρμπαριά όπως ο 
ξυλουργός κυνηγάει τους σκίνους Όπως περνάει η 
όχεντρα μες απ' τα περιβόλια των κριθαριών Mε τα 
περήφανα μάτια της οργισμένα Kι όπως οι αστραπές 
αλωνίζουν τα νιάτα. Kαι μη γελάς και μην κλαις και μη 

χαίρεσαι  
Mη σφίγγεις άδικα τα παπούτσια σου σα να φυτεύεις 
πλατάνια Mη γίνεσαι ΠEΠPΩMENON Γιατί δεν είναι ο 
σταυραητός ένα κλεισμένο συρτάρι Δεν είναι δάκρυ 
κορομηλιάς ούτε χαμόγελο νούφαρου Oύτε φανέλα 
περιστεριού και μαντολίνο Σουλτάνου Oύτε μεταξωτή 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    137                            

 

  

mocking the wives of the priests and lulling the lilies It is a 
wedding procession of Turks, a festival of Australians It is a 

hideaway of Hungarian Gypsies Where the hazel trees in 
autumn secretly congregate They watch the sensible storks 
dyeing their eggs black And then they also weep They burn 

their nightgowns and dress themselves in the duck's 
petticoat 

They strew stars on the ground for kings to walk upon With 
their silver amulets, with their crowns and their purple 

Mantles They strew rosemary in garden plots That mice may 
cross on their way to other cellars To enter other churches 
and to eat of the Holy Altars, And the owls, my lads, The 
owls are howling And dead nuns rise up to dance With 
tambourines and drums and violins, with bagpipes and 

lutes With bannerets and censors, with simples and magic 
veils With the pantaloons of bears in the frozen valley. They 
eat the mushrooms of martens They play heads or tails with 
the ring of Saint John and the gold florins of the Blackamoor 

They mock the witches They cut off the beard of a priest 
with the yataghan of Kolokotronis They bathe themselves in 
vapors of incense And afterwards, slowly chanting, enter the 
earth again and fall silent As waves fall silent, as the cuckoo 

bird at dawn, as the oil lamp 
at evening. And thus in a deep jar the grape shrivels and in 

the belfry of a fig tree the apple turns yellow And thus 
flaunting a gay-colored necktie Under a grapevine bower the 
summer suspires And thus naked among white cherry trees 
a tender love of mine lies sleeping A girl as unwithering as 
the branch of a flowering almond tree Her head resting on 

her elbow and her palm on her golden treasure On its early 
morning warmth while slowly and softly like a thief From the 

window of spring the Morning Star comes to awake her. 
 

II 
It is told of the mountains how they tremble and of the fir 
tree's fury When night gnaws at the nails of roof-tiles that 
the gnomes might enter When Hell sucks in the foaming 

turbulence of torrents When the hairline of the pepper tree 

φορεσιά για το κεφάλι της φάλαινας. Eίναι πριόνι 
θαλασσινό που πετσοκόβει τους γλάρους  

Eίναι προσκέφαλο μαραγκού είναι ρολόι ζητιάνου  
Eίναι φωτιά σ' ένα γύφτικο που κοροϊδεύει τις παπαδιές 
και νανουρίζει τα κρίνα Eίναι των Tούρκων συμπεθεριό 
των Aυστραλών πανηγύρι Eίναι λημέρι των Oύγγρων  

Που το χινόπωρο οι φουντουκιές πάνε κρυφά κι 
ανταμώνουνται Bλέπουν τους φρόνιμους πελαργούς να 
βάφουν μαύρα τ' αυγά τους Kαι τόνε κλαίνε κι αυτές 
Kαίνε τα νυχτικά τους και φορούν το μισοφόρι της 

πάπιας Στρώνουν αστέρια καταγής για να πατήσουν οι 
βασιλιάδες Mε τ' ασημένια τους χαϊμαλιά με την κορώνα 
και την πορφύρα Σκορπάνε δεντρολίβανο στις βραγιές  
Για να περάσουν οι ποντικοί να πάνε σ' άλλο κελλάρι 

Nα μπούνε σ' άλλες εκκλησιές να φαν τις Άγιες 
Tράπεζες Kι οι κουκουβάγιες παιδιά μου Oι 

κουκουβάγιες ουρλιάζουνε Kι οι πεθαμένες καλογριές 
σηκώνουνται να χορέψουν Mε ντέφια τούμπανα και 
βιολιά με πίπιζες και λαγούτα Mε φλάμπουρα και με 
θυμιατά με βότανα και μαγνάδια Mε της αρκούδας το 
βρακί στην παγωμένη κοιλάδα Tρώνε τα μανιτάρια των 
κουναβιών Παίζουν κορώνα γράμματα το δαχτυλίδι τ' 
Aη Γιαννιού και τα φλουριά του Aράπη Περιγελάνε τις 

μάγισσες  
Kόβουν τα γένια ενός παπά με του Kολοκοτρώνη το 
γιαταγάνι Λούζονται μες στην άχνη του λιβανιού Kι 
ύστερα ψέλνοντας αργά μπαίνουν ξανά στη γη και 
σωπαίνουν Όπως σωπαίνουν τα κύματα όπως ο 

κούκος τη χαραυγή όπως ο λύχνος το βράδυ. Έτσι σ' 
ένα πιθάρι βαθύ το σταφύλι ξεραίνεται και στο 

καμπαναριό μιας συκιάς κιτρινίζει το μήλο Έτσι με μια 
γραβάτα φανταχτερή Στην τέντα της κληματαριάς το 

καλοκαίρι ανασαίνει Έτσι κοιμάται ολόγυμνη μέσα στις 
άσπρες κερασιές μια τρυφερή μου αγάπη Ένα κορίτσι 
αμάραντο σα μυγδαλιάς κλωνάρι Mε το κεφάλι στον 

αγκώνα της γερτό και την παλάμη πάνω στο φλουρί της 
Πάνω στην πρωινή του θαλπωρή όταν σιγά-σιγά σαν 
τον κλέφτη Aπό το παραθύρι τής άνοιξης μπαίνει ο 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    138                            

 

  

becomes the North Wind's kick-about. Only the oxen of the 
Achaeans browse, vigorous and strong Amid the fat 

meadows of Thessaly, under the eternal sun that stares 
upon them 

They eat green grass, celery, leaves of the poplar tree, they 
drink the pure water of furrows They smell the sweat of the 

earth and then fall heavily under the shade of willow trees to 
sleep. Cast off the dead said Heraklitos and saw the 

heavens grow pale And saw two small cyclamen kissing 
each other in the mire And himself fell down on the 

hospitable earth to kiss his own dead body Like the wolf that 
comes down from the woods to look on the dead dog and to 

weep. 
What good is the raindrop to me that glitters on your 

forehead? I know that on your lips the thunderbolt has 
written its name I know that in your eyes an eagle has built 
its nest But here on the sodden bank there is one path only 
One deceiving path only, and you must pass through it You 
must steep yourself in blood before time overtakes you And 
cross over to find your companions again Flowers birds deer 
To find another sea another tenderness To seize the horses 

of Achilles by the reins Instead of sitting there silent, 
scolding the river Pelting the river with stones like the 

mother of Kitso. For even you will be lost and your beauty 
shall wither. Among the branches of an osier I see the 

innocent shirt of your 
childhood drying Take it, a flag of life, to make a shroud for 
death And may your heart yield not May your tears fall not 
on this implacable earth As once on the icy wastes rolled 
the tear of a penguin To complain is useless Life will be 
everywhere the same, with a flute of serpents in aland of 
phantoms With a song of thieves in a forest of fragrance 
With the knife-blade of sorrow in the cheeks of hope With 
the yearning of spring in the innermost heart of an owlet If 
only a plow may be found and a keen-edged scythe in a 

joyful hand If only there blossom 
A bit of grain for the holidays, a little wine for 

 remembrance, a little water for the dust.  

αυγερινός να την ξυπνήσει!  
 

II 
Λένε πως τρέμουν τα βουνά και πως θυμώνουν τα έλατα 
Όταν η νύχτα ροκανάει τις πρόκες των κεραμιδιών να 
μπουν οι καλικάντζαροι μέσα Όταν ρουφάει η κόλαση 

τον αφρισμένο μόχθο των χειμάρρων Ή όταν η 
χωρίστρα της πιπεριάς γίνεται του βοριά 

κλωτσοσκούφι. Mόνο τα βόδια των Aχαιών μες στα 
παχιά λιβάδια της Θεσσαλίας Bόσκουν ακμαία και 
δυνατά με τον αιώνιο ήλιο που τα κοιτάζει Tρώνε 
χορτάρι πράσινο φύλλα της λεύκας σέλινα πίνουνε 

καθαρό νερό μες στ' αυλάκια Mυρίζουν τον ιδρώτα της 
γης κι ύστερα πέφτουνε βαριά κάτω απ' τον ίσκιο της 

ιτιάς να κοιμηθούνε. Πετάτε τους νεκρούς είπ' ο 
Hράκλειτος κι είδε τον ουρανό να χλωμιάζει Kι είδε στη 
λάσπη δυο μικρά κυκλάμινα να φιλιούνται Kι έπεσε να 

φιλήσει κι αυτός το πεθαμένο σώμα του μες στο 
φιλόξενο χώμα Όπως ο λύκος κατεβαίνει απ' τους 

δρυμούς να δει το ψόφιο σκυλί και να κλάψει. Tί να μου 
κάμει η σταλαγματιά που λάμπει στο μέτωπό σου; Tο 
ξέρω πάνω στα χείλια σου έγραψε ο κεραυνός τ' όνομά 
του Tο ξέρω μέσα στα μάτια σου έχτισε ένας αητός τη 
φωλιά του Mα εδώ στην όχτη την υγρή μόνο ένας 
δρόμος υπάρχει Mόνο ένας δρόμος απατηλός και 

πρέπει να τον περάσεις Πρέπει στο αίμα να βουτηχτείς 
πριν ο καιρός σε προφτάσει Kαι να διαβείς αντίπερα να 
ξαναβρείς τους συντρόφους σου Άνθη πουλιά ελάφια 

Nα βρεις μιαν άλλη θάλασσα μιαν άλλη απαλοσύνη Nα 
πιάσεις από τα λουριά του Aχιλλέα τ' άλογα Aντί να 

κάθεσαι βουβή τον ποταμό να μαλώνεις Tον ποταμό να 
λιθοβολείς όπως η μάνα του Kίτσου. Γιατί κι εσύ θα 
'χεις χαθεί κι η ομορφιά σου θα 'χει γεράσει. Mέσα 
στους κλώνους μιας λυγαριάς βλέπω το παιδικό σου 
πουκάμισο να στεγνώνει Πάρ' το σημαία της ζωής να 
σαβανώσεις το θάνατο Kι ας μη λυγίσει η καρδιά σου 

Kι ας μην κυλήσει το δάκρυ σου πάνω στην αδυσώπητη 
τούτη γη Όπως εκύλησε μια φορά στην παγωμένη 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    139                            

 

  

 
III 

In courtyards of the sorrow-stricken no sun rises And only 
worms emerge to mock at the stars And only horses sprout 
amid the ant heaps And all the bats eat birds and piss their 

sperm. In courtyards of the sorrow-stricken no night falls 
Only the foliage vomits a river of tears When the devil 

passes by to mount the dogs And ravens swim in a deep 
well of blood. 

In courtyards of the sorrow-stricken the eye has dried 
The brain has frozen, the heart has turned to stone 

The flesh of frogs hangs down from the teeth of spidersAnd 
starving locusts scream at the feet of vampires. In 

courtyards of the sorrow-stricken the grass grows black On 
a May evening now, a breeze drifts by A footfall as light as a 

faint prairie tremor A kiss of the sea adorned and decked 
with foam. And if you thirst for water we shall wring a cloud 
And if you hunger for bread we shall slay a nightingale Wait 
but a moment only for the rue to unravel For the black sky to 

blaze, the mullein to flower. It was only a breeze and is 
gone, a lark and is lost It was only the face of May, the 

moon's cold whiteness A footfall as light as a faint prairie 
tremor A kiss of the sea adorned and decked with foam. 

 
IV 

Awake purling water from the pine tree's root to find the 
eyes of sparrows and to revive them, refreshing the earth 
with the fragrance of basil and the spluttering of lizards. I 

know you are a vein laid bare under the dreadful gaze of the 
wind, a mute spark amid the bright throng of stars. No one 
attends you, no one pauses to hear you breathe, but you 

with your sure tread amid arrogant nature will reach one day 
to the topmost leaves of the apricot, you will climb the 

slender bodies of small broom shrubs, you will glide from 
the eyes of the beloved like an adolescent moon. 

Somewhere an immortal rock exists where a human angel 
once passing inscribed his name and a song as yet 

unknown by anyone, not by the most delirious children nor 

ερημιά το δάκρυ του πιγκουίνου Δεν ωφελεί το 
παράπονο  Ίδια παντού θα 'ναι η ζωή με το σουραύλι 
των φιδιών στη χώρα των φαντασμάτων Mε το τραγούδι 
των ληστών στα δάση των αρωμάτων Mε το μαχαίρι 
ενός καημού στα μάγουλα της ελπίδας Mε το μαράζι 
μιας άνοιξης στα φυλλοκάρδια του γκιώνη Φτάνει ένα 

αλέτρι να βρεθεί κι ένα δρεπάνι κοφτερό σ' ένα 
χαρούμενο χέρι Φτάνει ν' ανθίσει μόνο Λίγο στάρι για 
τις γιορτές λίγο κρασί $για τη θύμηση λίγο νερό για τη 

σκόνη...  
 

III 
Στου πικραμένου την αυλή ήλιος δεν ανατέλλει Mόνο 
σκουλήκια βγαίνουνε να κοροϊδέψουν τ' άστρα Mόνο 
φυτρώνουν άλογα στις μυρμηγκοφωλιές Kαι νυχτερίδες 
τρων πουλιά και κατουράνε σπέρμα.Στου πικραμένου 

την αυλή δε βασιλεύει η νύχτα Mόνο ξερνάν οι 
φυλλωσιές ένα ποτάμι δάκρυα Όταν περνάει ο 

διάβολος να καβαλήσει τα σκυλιά Kαι τα κοράκια 
κολυμπάν σ' ένα πηγάδι μ' αίμα. Στου πικραμένου την 
αυλή το μάτι έχει στερέψει Έχει παγώσει το μυαλό κι 
έχει η καρδιά πετρώσει Kρέμονται σάρκες βατραχιών 
στα δόντια της αράχνης Σκούζουν ακρίδες νηστικές σε 
βρυκολάκων πόδια.Στου πικραμένου την αυλή βγαίνει 
χορτάρι μαύρο Mόνο ένα βράδυ του Mαγιού πέρασε 
ένας αγέρας Ένα περπάτημα ελαφρύ σα σκίρτημα του 
κάμπου Ένα φιλί της θάλασσας της αφροστολισμένης. 

 
IV 

 Kι αν θα διψάσεις για νερό θα στίψουμε ένα σύννεφο  
Kι αν θα πεινάσεις για ψωμί θα σφάξουμε ένα αηδόνι  

Mόνο καρτέρει μια στιγμή ν' ανοίξει ο πικραπήγανος N' 
αστράψει ο μαύρος ουρανός να λουλουδίσει ο φλόμος. 
Mα είταν αγέρας κι έφυγε κορυδαλλός κι εχάθη Eίταν 
του Mάη το πρόσωπο του φεγγαριού η ασπράδα Ένα 
περπάτημα ελαφρύ σα σκίρτημα του κάμπου Ένα φιλί  
της θάλασσας της αφροστολισμένης. Ξύπνησε γάργαρο 
νερό από τη ρίζα του πεύκου να βρεις τα μάτια των 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    140                            

 

  

the profoundest nightingales. It is locked now in a cave of 
Mt. Devi in the remote valleys and the ravines of my 

forefathers' land, but when this angelic song bursts out one 
day and flings itself against time and corruption, the rains 

will suddenly cease and the mud will dry, the snows will melt 
on the mountains, the wind will sing like a bird, the swallows 

will come to life, the osiers will quiver, and men with cold 
eyes and pale faces, hearing the bells in the cracked 

belfries ringing by themselves, will find holiday caps to wear 
and gay-colored ribbons to tie on their shoes. For then no 
one will ever joke again, the blood of brooks will overflow, 
the animals will burst from their bridles in the mangers, the 

hay will turn green in the stables, on the roof-tiles fresh 
poppies and mayflowers will sprout, and suddenly    on all 

the crossroads at midnight red bonfires will blaze. And then 
the timid girls will come slowly and quietly to cast their last 
garments into the flames and to dance about them nakedly, 

exactly as when we too were young and a window would 
open at dawn that in their breasts might sprout a flaming 
carnation. Ah lads, it may be that the memory we have of 

our forefathers is a deeper consolation and a more precious 
companion than a handful of rose water, that the intoxication 

of beauty is no different from the sleeping rose tree of 
Eurotas. Goodnight, then: I see a multitude of falling stars 

rocking your dreams, but I hold in my fingers the music for a 
better day. The travelers returned from the Indies have 

much more to tell you than all the Byzantine chroniclers. 
Man during the course of his Mysterious Existence Has 

bequeathed to  
his Descendants tokens, diverse and worthy, of his Immortal 
Origin As indeed he has also bequeathed traces of the ruins  

of early dawn snowfalls of celestial reptiles,   kites,  
diamonds,   and the glances of hyacinths Amid sighs, tears, 
hungers, lamentations, and the ashes of subterranean wells. 

 
VI 

How much I loved you only I know 
I who once touched you with the eyes of the Pleiades 

σπουργιτιών και να τα ζωντανέψεις ποτίζοντας το χώμα 
με μυρωδιά βασιλικού και με σφυρίγματα σαύρας. Tο 
ξέρω είσαι μια φλέβα γυμνή κάτω από το φοβερό 

βλέμμα του ανέμου είσαι μια σπίθα βουβή μέσα στο 
λαμπερό πλήθος των άστρων. Δε σε προσέχει κανείς 
κανείς δε σταματά ν' ακούσει την ανάσα σου μα συ με 
το βαρύ σου περπάτημα μες στην αγέρωχη φύση θα 
φτάσεις μια μέρα στα φύλλα της βερυκοκιάς θ' ανέβεις 

στα λυγερά κορμιά των μικρών σπάρτων και θα 
κυλήσεις από τα μάτια μιας αγαπητικιάς σαν εφηβικό 
φεγγάρι. Yπάρχει μια πέτρα αθάνατη που κάποτε 

περαστικός ένας ανθρώπινος άγγελος έγραψε τ' όνομά 
του επάνω της κι ένα τραγούδι που δεν το ξέρει ακόμα 
κανείς ούτε τα πιο τρελά παιδιά ούτε τα πιο σοφά τ' 
αηδόνια. Eίναι κλεισμένη τώρα σε μια σπηλιά του 

βουνού Nτέβι μέσα στις λαγκαδιές και στα φαράγγια της 
πατρικής μου γης μα όταν ανοίξει κάποτε και τιναχτεί 
ενάντια στη φθορά και στο χρόνο αυτό το αγγελικό 

τραγούδι θα πάψει ξαφνικά η βροχή και θα στεγνώσουν 
οι λάσπες τα χιόνια θα λιώσουν στα βουνά θα 

κελαηδήσει ο άνεμος τα χελιδόνια θ' αναστηθούν οι 
λυγαριές θα ριγήσουν κι οι άνθρωποι με τα κρύα μάτια 
και τα χλωμά πρόσωπα όταν ακούσουν τις καμπάνες να 
χτυπάν μέσα στα ραγισμένα καμπαναριά μοναχές τους 
θα βρουν καπέλα γιορτινά να φορέσουν και φιόγκους 
φανταχτερούς να δέσουν στα παπούτσια τους. Γιατί 

τότε κανείς δε θ' αστιεύεται πια το αίμα των ρυακιών θα 
ξεχειλίσει τα ζώα θα κόψουν τα χαλινάρια τους στα 
παχνιά το χόρτο θα πρασινίσει στους στάβλους στα 
κεραμίδια θα πεταχτούν ολόχλωρες παπαρούνες και 
μάηδες και σ' όλα τα σταυροδρόμια θ' ανάψουν 

κόκκινες φωτιές τα μεσάνυχτα. Tότε θα 'ρθούν σιγά-
σιγά τα φοβισμένα κορίτσια για να πετάξουν το 
τελευταίο τους ρούχο στη φωτιά κι ολόγυμνα θα 

χορέψουν τριγύρω της όπως την εποχή ακριβώς που 
είμασταν κι εμείς νέοι κι άνοιγε ένα παράθυρο την αυγή 

για να φυτρώσει στο στήθος τους ένα φλογάτο 
γαρύφαλο. Παιδιά ίσως η μνήμη των προγόνων να είναι 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    141                            

 

  

And embraced you with the mane of the moon and danced 
with you on the summery plains On the hewn stubble and 

ate cut clover together O dark vast sea with so many 
pebbles around your neck so many colored stones in your 

hair. A vessel sails into the bay, a rusty well-wheel groaning 
A tuft of blue smoke within the rose of the horizon Exactly 

like the wing of a crane throbbing; Armies of swallows await 
brave men to offer them welcome Arms rise up naked with 
anchors engraved near the armpits The cries of children 
mingle with the birdsongs of the West Wind Honeybees 

buzz in and out of a cow's nostrils The kerchiefs of 
Kalamata are waving And a distant bell dabbles the sky with 

bluing Like the sound of a small gong traveling amid the 
constellations So  many centuries fled From the souls of 

Goths and the domes of Baltimore And from lost St. Sophia, 
the renowned cathedral. But who are those who watch with 

unwavering eyes and serene faces from the top of the 
highest mountains? This duststorm in the air is the echo of 

what conflagration? Can it be Kalivas fighting or is it 
Levendoyannis? Is it a clash perhaps between the Germans 

and the people of Mani? No, it neither Kalivas fighting nor 
Levendoyannis Nor is it a clash between the Germans and 

the people of Mani. Towers are guarding in silence a 
princess turned phantom The tops of cypress trees 

companion a dead windflower Shepherds with reeds of 
linden serenely sing their morning songs A foolish hunter 
fires on turtle-doves And an old windmill, forgotten by all 

Mends by itself its rotting sails with a needle of dolphin bone 
And descends from the hillsides with a favorable northeaster 
As Adonis descended the paths of Mt. Helmos to say good 

evening to Golfo. Year after year have I struggled with 
hammer and ink, O my tormented heart I With gold and fire 
to stitch you an embroidery the hya cinth of an orange tree,  

A blossoming quince to console you I who once touched you  
with the eyes of the Pleiades And embraced you with the 
mane of the moon and danced with you on the summery 
plains On the hewn stubble and ate cut clover together O 
dark vast solitude with so many pebbles around your neck 

βαθύτερη παρηγοριά και πιο πολύτιμη συντροφιά από 
μια χούφτα ροδόσταμο και το μεθύσι της ομορφιάς 

τίποτε διαφορετικό από την κοιμισμένη τριανταφυλλιά 
του Eυρώτα. Kαληνύχτα λοιπόν βλέπω σωρούς 

πεφτάστερα να σας λικνίζουν τα όνειρα μα εγώ κρατώ 
στα δάχτυλά μου τη μουσική για μια καλύτερη μέρα. Oι 
ταξιδιώτες των Iνδιών ξέρουνε περισσότερα να σας 

πουν απ' τους Bυζαντινούς χρονογράφους. O 
άνθρωπος κατά τον ρουν της μυστηριώδους ζωής του 
Kατέλιπεν εις τους απογόνους του δείγματα πολλαπλά 
και αντάξια της αθανάτου καταγωγής του Όπως επίσης 

κατέλιπεν ίχνη των ερειπίων τού λυκαυγούς 
χιονοστιβάδας ουρανίων ερπετών χαρταετούς 

αδάμαντας και βλέμματα υακίνθων  
Eν μέσω αναστεναγμών δακρύων πείνης οιμωγών και 

τέφρας υπογείων φρεάτων.  
 

VI 
Πόσο πολύ σε αγάπησα εγώ μονάχα το ξέρω Eγώ που 
κάποτε σ' άγγιξα με τα μάτια της πούλιας Kαι με τη 
χαίτη του φεγγαριού σ' αγκάλιασα και χορέψαμε μες 

στους καλοκαιριάτικους κάμπους  
Πάνω στη θερισμένη καλαμιά και φάγαμε μαζί το 
κομένο τριφύλλι Mαύρη μεγάλη θάλασσα με τόσα 

βότσαλα τριγύρω στο λαιμό τόσα χρωματιστά πετράδια 
στα μαλλιά σου. Ένα καράβι μπαίνει στο γιαλό ένα 
μαγγανοπήγαδο σκουριασμένο βογγάει Mια τούφα 
γαλανός καπνός μες στο τριανταφυλλί του ορίζοντα 
Ίδιος με τη φτερούγα του γερανού που σπαράζει 
Στρατιές χελιδονιών περιμένουνε να πουν στους 

αντρειωμένους το καλωσόρισες  
Mπράτσα σηκώνουνται γυμνά με χαραγμένες άγκυρες 
στη μασχάλη Mπερδεύουνται κραυγές παιδιών με το 
ελάδημα του πουνέντε Mέλισσες μπαινοβγαίνουνε μες 
στα ρουθούνια των αγελάδων Mαντήλια καλαματιανά 
κυματίζουνε Kαι μια καμπάνα μακρινή βάφει τον 

ουρανό με λουλάκι Σαν τη φωνή κάποιου σήμαντρου 
που ταξιδεύει μέσα στ' αστέρια Tόσους αιώνες φευγάτο  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    142                            

 

  

so many colored precious stones in your hair.  

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

Aπό των Γότθων την ψυχή κι από τους τρούλλους της 
Bαλτιμόρης Kι απ' τη χαμένη Aγιά-Σοφιά το μέγα 

μοναστήρι. Mα πάνω στ' αψηλά βουνά ποιοι να 'ναι 
αυτοί που κοιτάνε Mε την ακύμαντη ματιά και το γαλήνιο 
πρόσωπο; Ποιας πυρκαγιάς να 'ναι αντίλαλος αυτός ο 
κουρνιαχτός στον αγέρα; Mήνα ο Kαλύβας πολεμάει 
μήνα ο Λεβεντογιάννης; Mήπως αμάχη επιάσανεν οι 

Γερμανοί με τους Mανιάτες; Oυδ' ο Kαλύβας πολεμάει κι 
ουδ' ο Λεβεντογιάννης Oύτε κι αμάχη επιάσανεν οι 
Γερμανοί με τους Mανιάτες. Πύργοι φυλάνε σιωπηλοί 
μια στοιχειωμένη πριγκίπισσα Kορφές κυπαρισσιών 
συντροφεύουνε μια πεθαμένη ανεμώνη Tσοπαναρέοι 

ατάραχοι μ' ένα καλάμι φλαμουριάς λένε το πρωινό τους 
τραγούδι Ένας ανόητος κυνηγός ρίχνει μια ντουφεκιά 

στα τρυγόνια Kι ένας παλιός ανεμόμυλος λησμονημένος 
απ' όλους Mε μια βελόνα δελφινιού ράβει τα σάπια του 

πανιά μοναχός του  
Kαι κατεβαίνει απ' τις πλαγιές με τον καράγιαλη πρίμα 
Όπως κατέβαινε ο Άδωνις στα μονοπάτια του Xελμού 
να πει μια καλησπέρα της Γκόλφως. Xρόνια και χρόνια 
πάλεψα με το μελάνι και το σφυρί βασανισμένη καρδιά 
μου Mε το χρυσάφι και τη φωτιά για να σου κάμω ένα 
κέντημα Ένα ζουμπούλι πορτοκαλιάς Mιαν ανθισμένη 
κυδωνιά να σε παρηγορήσω Eγώ που κάποτε σ' άγγιξα 
με τα μάτια της πούλιας Kαι με τη χαίτη του φεγγαριού 
σ' αγκάλιασα και χορέψαμε μες στους αλοκαιριάτικους 
κάμπους Πάνω στη θερισμένη καλαμιά και φάγαμε μαζί 
το κομένο τριφύλλι Mαύρη μεγάλη μοναξιά με τόσα 

βότσαλα τριγύρω στο λαιμό τόσα χρωματιστά πετράδια 
στα μαλλιά σου. 

 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    143                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhalas Yianis (1924) 
 

 
 

 
He was born in Filippiada, Ipiros, and he studied in the School of Philosophy at the 

University of Athens. His poetry is innovative, modernistic. He also wrote some essays about 
Greek literature and he contributed with many newspapers and literary magazines. He has 
translated many of the ancient Greek epigrammatic, satirical and lyrical poets. His books of 
poetry have been translated into English, French and Italia. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Γιάννης Δάλας γεννήθηκε στη Φιλιππιάδα της Ηπείρου και σπούδασε Φιλοσοφία 

στο Πανεπιστήμιο της Αθήνας. Η ποίησή του είναι πρωτοποριακή και μοντέρνα. Έχει γράψει 
πολλά δοκίμια  για την ελληνική λογοτεχνία και άρθρα για εφημερίδες και λογοτεχνικά 
περιοδικά. Έχει μεταφράσει πολλούς αρχαίους σατυρικούς και λυρικούς ποιητές. Τα βιβλία 
του έχουν μεταφραστεί στα Αγγλκά, Γαλλικά και Ιταλικά. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    144                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Ad Otium Literatum 

(1956) 

 

Ad Otium Literatum 

 (1956) 
 

Afternoon of flight. Memory swarms up the body of summer, 
up the shriveled branches of the Coming Day. I drive my chariot to 

the foreign city. My noble lord, it's been a year now since 
you've received a parchment about the health of my ideas. But 

the chariot you would do wrong to name it glory for it lies 
amid inglorious lances like the ghost of a betrayed adolescent. 

I shall speak sometimes of the most intimate things. Now, for 
instance, I connect words like Roadblock-December, Spring-

Desdemona. Now let it suffice you that I am here together 
with my charioteer. We light up the new pyre with our 

companions, 
we eat what has past, and tomorrow's birds shall eat our 

entrails. The night, an alien spearman, comes and sets his 
secret trapdoors. Below, people of music gather, and from 

the heights the realm of stars is a naked justice that robs the 
heart. 

Well then, I beg of you, great scholastic brother, forgive me, 
and you other shield-bearers too, if I try to become a hero 

once more. It may be that a glow from the new conflagration 
may even reach to your imaginary universe. And so I beg  

of you, let the tower sentry this spring also keep vigilant,  let 
him deny his Desdemona.   

Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 
Απόγευμα φυγής. Aναρριχάται ή μνήμη στο σώμα 
του καλοκαιριού στα ρικνωμένα κλαδιά της Eπιούσης. 

Oδηγώ το άρμα στην ξένη πολιτεία. Ευγενικέ μου 
κύριε είναι ένας χρόνος πού δεν έλαβες διφθέρα για 

την υγεία των ιδεών μου. Όμως το άρμα αν τ' 
ονομάζεις δόξα άσχημα πράττεις γιατί σ ' άδοξες 
λόχμες κοίτεται σαν ένα φάντασμα προδομένου 
εφήβου. Θα μιλήσω για τα πιο μύχια κάποτε. Πώς 

γεφυρώνω τις λέξεις λόγου χάρη: oδόφραγμα-
Δεκέμβρης Άνοιξη-Δυσδαιμόνα. Τώρα αρκέσου πώς 
είμαι εδώ με συντροφεύει ο ηνίοχος μου ανάβομε τη 
νέα πυρά με τους συντρόφους τρώμε τα περασμένα 
και μας τρων τα σπλάχνα τ' αυριανά πουλιά. Σαν 
δορυφόρος ξένη έρχεται ή νύχτα απλώνει τις 

καταπακτές της. Κάτω λαός της μουσικής κι από τα 
ύψη γυμνή δικαιοσύνη ή συνοικία των άστρων μου 
κλέβει την καρδιά. Λοιπόν παρακαλώ σε μεγάλε 
ελλόγιμε αδελφέ συγχώρεσε με κι εσείς οι άλλοι 
ασπιδοφόροι αν δοκιμάσω να ξαναγίνω ήρωας. 

Μπορεί μια λάμψη να φτάσει ως τη φανταστική σας 
οικουμένη από τη νέα πυρά. Γι' αυτό παρακαλώ σε 

ας γρηγορήσει ας αρνηθεί κι αυτή την άνοιξη  
τη Δυσδαιμόνα του ο βιγλάτορας του πύργου. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    145                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhimakis Minas (1914 - 1980) 
 

 
 

 
Dhimakis Minas was born in 1914 in Iraklion, Crete, and he killed himself ( 

committed suicide) in Athens in 1980.He was a bank worker and during the 2o World War he 
fight against the German in Crete. For his work, he has been priced many times; he won the 
Second State Prize in Poetry for 1960 and the Athen’s Academy Award in Poetry for 1973. In 
addition to his poetry, he has translated in Greek many foreigner poets. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Μηνάς Δημάκης γενήθηκε το 1914 στο Ηράκλειο Κρήτης. Εργάστηκε ως 

υπάλληλος τράπεζας και κατά τη διάρκεια του 2ου Παγκοσμίου Πολέμου αγωνίστηκε κατά 
των Γερμανών στην Κρήτη. Για το έργο του βραβεύτηκε πολλές φορές. Κέρδισε το Δεύτερο 
Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης το 1960 και το Βραβείο Ποίησης της Ακαδημίας Αθηνών το 1973. 
΄Έχει μεταφράσει στα ελληνικά και πολλούς ξένους ποιητές. Αυτοκτόνησε το 1980 στην 
Αθήνα.  
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    146                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Eleonora, the Minoan Parisienne 

(1953) 

 

Ελεονόρα, η Μινωική Παριζιάνα 

 (1953) 
 

When The house fell into disuseAnd all the rooms were 
garmented in white The large mirror the picture frames The 

gaudy chandelier in the middle of the ceiling What could we 
do now with so much 

Useless furniture? We thought of selling it at any priceAnd 
after retaining  what was neededOf renting out the empty 

rooms To the deadYou can thus be assured of good 
company And there's little chance of being bored fter all they 

quickly  begin to smellAnd by throwing them out you can 
pocket the  rentThen you thrust in others still freshThey 

begin to smell 
You throw them out Pocket the rentGood company good  

Business And even the children get to know what life's like! 
(I no longer rememberHow many many dead we housed By 
renting out our souls unceasingly) What a nuisance to unlock 
and then lock up Broken-down reception rooms day after 

day  
And to dust off remembrances with a piece of cloth  

But no one came And you wanted no one ever to come 
Even the children of the house Still so very young Put us to a 
great deal of trouble: They'd sneak into the frozen rooms And 
want by all means to represent Very ancient statues and 

murals Truly!And in particular that young girl With the large 
eyes And the translucent face Who would glue to the wall 
Her profile as yet unformed And wanted to remain like that 
Forever Later on when she grew older They discovered her 

from the ends of the Universe And enthroned her in the 
 largest photographic periodical in the world 

To represent the Parisienne of Knossos And when because 
of this occasion she was sent a message And indeed from 

the French poet Paul Claudel Who spoke about eternal  
Odysseus Eternally returning To the ages Ah we understood 

 

Όταν Ρήμαξε το σπίτι Και όλες οι κάμαρες ντύθηκαν 
άσπρα Ό μεγάλος καθρέφτης τα κάδρα Ή φανταχτερή 
λάμπα στη μέση της οροφής Και τι τα ήθελες πια τα 

πολλά έπιπλα "Εμεναν άχρηστα Είπαμε να πουλήσουμε 
όσο-όσο Αφού κρατήσουμε τ' απαραίτητα Και να 

νοικιάζουμε τ' αδειανά δωμάτια Σε πεθαμένους "Ετσι 
έχεις καλή συντροφιά Δεν προφθάνεις και να βαρεθείς 
Στο κάτω-κάτω αυτοί γρήγορα βρωμίζουν Τους πετάς 
έξω κερδίζεις το νοίκι Μπάζεις άλλους πιο φρέσκους 
Βρωμίζουν Τους πετάς έξω Κερδίζεις το νοίκι Καλή 
συντροφιά καλή επιχείρηση Και συνηθίζουν και τα 
παιδιά στη ζωή! (Δεν το θυμάμαι πια Πόσους και 
πόσους πεθαμένους σπιτώσαμε Νοικιάζοντας 

αδιάκοπα την ψυχή μας) 
Και τι κόπος να κλειδώνεις και να ξεκλειδώνεις 

Ρημαγμένες κάμαρες υποδοχής κάθε μέρα Και να 
ξεσκονίζεις τις αναμνήσεις μ' ένα κομμάτι πανί Και 
κανείς δεν έρχεται Και κανείς δε θέλεις να 'ρθει πια 
Αλλά και τα παιδιά του σπιτιού Τόσο μικρούτσικα 
ακόμη Μας έβαναν σε σκοτούρες: Χώνονταν στα 
παγωμένα δωμάτια Και ήθελαν ναι και καλά να 

παριστάνουν Πανάρχαια αγάλματα και τοιχογραφίες 
Μάλιστα! 

Και περισσότερο εκείνη ή κοπελίτσα Με τα μεγάλα 
μάτια Το διάφανο πρόσωπο Κολνούσε στον τοίχο ένα 
προφίλ Ασχημάτιστο ακόμη Και ήθελε έτσι να μείνει 

Παντοτινά 
Αργότερα σα μεγάλωσε Την ανακάλυψαν από τα 
πέρατα της οικουμένης Και τη θρόνιασαν στο 

μεγαλύτερο εικονογραφημένο περιοδικό του κόσμου Να 
παριστάνει την Παριζιάνα της Κνωσού Μα σαν πήρε 

ένα μήνυμα από τούτη την αφορμή Και μάλιστα από τον 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    147                            

 

  

then That the matter was cut and dried And extremely 
suspicious: They wanted to propagandize her And convert 

her to the Catholic Church Now What's the difference 
whether  

you kiss the Pope's or the Patriarch's hand! When you come 
right down to it Are the murals of the Sistine Chapel better 

Than the frescoes of Knossos? I don't believe it But here's a 
suspicion: Perhaps a proclamation of sainthood awaited her! 

And here's another uneasy thought: Perhaps she should 
have taken a trip to the Vatican! Then the girl began to 

protest For having traveled throughout so many centuries 
She no longer wanted to budge from her island But then 

alas Finding nothing better to do She became a lady like all  
the others Nothing more Playing cards Smoking  cigarettes 

ighting the void around her... Indeed now she's become 
quite fat 

 

 
Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

ποιητή της Γαλλίας Τον Paul Claudel Πού μιλούσε για 
τον αιώνιο Οδυσσέα Πού αιώνια ξαναγύριζε Στους 
αιώνες                                  Α! τότε καταλάβαμε Το 
πράγμα ήταν και πολύ φανερό Και πολύ ύποπτο 
"Ηθελαν να της κάνουν προπαγάνδα Και να την 

προσηλυτίσουν στον Καθολικισμό Τώρα Τι να φιλάς το 
χέρι του Πάπα ή του Πατριάρχη! Αλλ' επιτέλους είναι 
καλύτερες Οι τοιχογραφίες της Cappella Sistina Από τα 
φρέσκα της Κνωσού; Δεν το πιστεύω Aλλά και μια 
υποψία: Μήπως την περίμενε ανακήρυξη αγιότητας! 
Άλλα και άλλη ανησυχία: Μήπως έπρεπε να ταξιδέψει 
ως το Βατικανό! Και το κορίτσι άρχισε να διαμαρτύρεται 

Ταξιδεμένο σε τόσους αιώνες Δεν ήθελε πια να το 
κουνήσει από το νησί του Και τότε αλίμονο Μη 

βρίσκοντας και το καλύτερο Έγινε μια κυρία σαν όλες 
Τίποτ' άλλο Χαρτοπαίζοντας Καπνίζοντας τσιγάρα 

Παλεύοντας με το άδειο γύρω... Άρχισε μάλιστα λίγο να 
παχαίνει . 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    148                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhimoulas Athos (1921 - 1985) 
 

 
 

 

Dhimoulas Athos was born on 1921 in Athens and and died there on 1985. He studied civil 
engineering at the National Polytechnical School there, studied higher mathematical and 

theoretical engineering at the Imperial College in London and in 1962 was invited to Paris for 
further research by the Agence pour la Cooperation Technique, Industrielle et Economique. 

He has published eleven books of poetry, won the Second State Prize for 1966, and has been 
translated into English, French, German and Polish. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Άθως Δημουλάς γεννήθηκε το 1921 στην Αθήνα. Σπούδασε πολιτικός μηχανικός 

στο Εθνικό Μετσόβιο Πολυτεχνείο και Ανώτερα Μαθηματικά και Θεωρητικά Ανάλυση στο 
κολέγιο Imperial στο Λονδίνο. Το 1962 προσκλήθηκε στο Παρίσι από την Υπηρεσία για την 
Τεχνική, Βιομηχανική και Οικονομική Συνεργασία. Έξέδωσε έντεκα βιβλία ποίησης, κέρδισε 
το Δεύτερο Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης το 1966 και τα έργα του έχουν μεταφραστεί στα 
αγγλικά, Γαλλικά, Γερμανικά και Πολωνικά. Πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1985. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    149                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Sic Transit 

(1957) 

 

Sic Transit 

 (1957) 
 

This mansion, faced in marble, with a majestic entrance, 
with its beautiful rhythm of ancient times, the noblest in our 
city, now dilapidated, is being torn down. Together with it 

will vanish the emotions it arouses, and perhaps in time we 
shall cease to remember it. Even its interior decoration was 

rich, 
created with great art. In particular 

the walls of the great reception hall. 
From the hand of genuine painters, 

scenes from history and life skillfully wrought. 
Now that they are tearing it down, the portrayal on the  

wall next to the window comes persistently to mind:  
it depicted an ancient palace in ruins. 

 
Translated by:  Kimon Friar 

 

 

Το μέγαρο αυτό, με μάρμαρο ντυμένο, με είσοδο 
μεγαλοπρεπή, με τον ωραίο παλαιικό ρυθμό του, το 
πιο αρχοντικό στην πόλη μας, τώρα, ετοιμόρροπο, 

κατεδαφίζεται. Μαζί του θα σβήση κι ή συγκίνηση της 
θέας του· με τον καιρό ίσως κι ή ανάμνηση του. Κι ο 
εσωτερικός διάκοσμος του πλούσιος και με τέχνη 
καμωμένος. Ιδιαίτερα οι τοίχοι στης υποδοχής τη 
μεγάλη αίθουσα. Από χέρι ζωγράφων γνήσιων 

φιλοτεχνημένες σκηνές της ιστορίας και της ζωής. Τώρα 
πού το κατεδαφίζουν επίμονα φέρνω στο νου μου την 
παράσταση του τοίχου δίπλα στα παράθυρα: έδειχνε 

σε ερείπια ένα παλάτι αρχαίο. 
 

 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    150                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhikteos Ares (1917 - 1983)
 

 
 

 
He was born in Iraklio, Crete in 1917 and he died in 1983 in Athens. He studied law at 

the University of Athens for three years, then served as army translator during the war with 
Italy and Germany.  He published books of poetry, including collected editions, and won the 
State Prize of Poetry for 1976, a joint award with Yannis Ritsos. He also did an excellent 
work in translations. He translated a great number of very important foreigner writers. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Άρης Δικταίος γεννήθηκε στο Ηράκλειο Κρήτης το 1917. Σπούδασε Νομικά στο 

Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών για τρία χρόνια και υπηρέτησε ως μεταφραστής του στρατού κατά τη 
διάρκεια του πολέμου με την Ιταλία και τη Γερμανία. Εξέδωσε βιβλία ποίησης και 
μοιράστηκε το Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης το 1976, με τον Γιάννη Ρίτσο. Έκανε επίσης 
πολλές μεταφράσεις πολύ σημαντικών ξένων συγγραφέων. Πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1983. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    151                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

 

Beauty 

(1935-53) 

 

 

Ομορφιά 

(1935-53) 
 

Star that, when risen within us, never sets: 
hovering in our innermost firmament like a sword 

of justice against impositions coming from outside. 
But if it loses its way upon our flesh, 

it passes like a caress exposing us to strangers' eyes, 
causes us pain, kills our sleep and, finally throws us 
out, useless bones, to its faithful dog, death, who is 

awaiting. 

Translated by:  University of Oklahoma 

 

 

Άστρο πού αν ανατείλη μέσα μας, δε βασιλεύει: στο 
εσώτερο μας στερέωμα αιωρείται ως σπάθη δικαιοσύνης 
ενάντια στις επιβουλές πού άρχονται άπ' έξω. Μ' αν το 
δρόμο της χάση στη σάρκα μας πάνω, περνά σαν 
χάδι πού στα ξένα μάτια μας εκθέτει και μας πονεί και 
σκοτώνει τον ύπνο μας και μας πετά, τέλος, άχρηστο 
κόκκαλο, στο πιστό της σκυλί, τον θάνατο, πού 

περιμένει. 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    152                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhoukaris Dhimitris (1925 - 1982) 
 

 
 

 
Dhoukaris Dhimitris was born in Athens on 1925 and died there on 1982. He became 

a member of the left-wing National Liberation Front (EAM) in 1944, and took part in the 
resistance movement. Because of his political activities he spent about three and a half years 
in various detention camps and prisons. He resigned in disillusionment when Russia invaded 
Hungary in the summer of 1957, and since then ceased to involve himself in political 
activities. In June 1958 he left for Africa where he worked as plantation supervisor and 
newspaper repor¬ter. He has published nineteen books of poetry. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Δημήτρης Δούκαρης γεννήθηκε στην Αθήνα το 1925. Έγινε μέλος της αριστερής 

πτέρυγας του Εθνικού Απελευθερωτικού Μετώπου (ΕΑΜ) το 1944 και έλαβε μέρος στην 
Αντίσταση. Εξαιτίας των πολιτικών  του δραστηριοτήτων τριάμισι χρόνια σε διάφορα 
στρατόπεδα κράτησης και φυλακές. Παραιτήθηκε από κάθε πολιτική δραστηριότητα 
απογοητευμένος, όταν η Ρωσία εισέβαλε στην Ουγγαρία το καλοκαίρι του 1957. Τον Ιούνιο 
του 1958 έφυγε για την Αφρική όπου δούλεψε ως επιβλέπων σε φυτεία και ρεπόρτερ σε 
εφημερίδες. Εξέδωσε δεκαεννιά βιβλία ποίησης. Απεβίωσε στην Αθήνα το 1982. 

 
 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    153                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The body of Ideas 

(1980) 

 

Το σώμα των Ιδεών 

 (1980) 
 

If ideas have no real body, if theories 
have no real life then they are only  
phantoms under false skin, they are 

 visions of the deceived, delusions of those 
who ran into adversity and irrevocably missed 

the live voices of life-giving night; where Rousing 
awakes unexpectedly, and never rests 

in delusion; Rousing of the real body of ideas. 
 

 
Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis 

 

 

Αν δεν έχουν αληθινό σώμα οι ιδέες, οι θεωρίες 
αν δεν έχουν πραγματική ζωή, τότε είναι φαντάσματα με 
ψεύτικο δέρμα, είναι οράματα απατημένων, αυταπάτες 
εκείνων πού ατύχησαν κι έχασαν ανεπίστρεπτα τις 
ζωντανές φωνές της ζωοδότρας νύχτας εκεί πού 
αφυπνίζεται αιφνιδιαστικάή Εξέγερση, και δεν 

επαναπαύεται ποτέ στην αυταπάτη η Εξέγερση του 
αληθινού σώματος των ιδεών. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    154                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhrakontaedes Philippos (1940) 
 

 
 

 
Dhrakontaedes Philippos was born in 1940. In addition to his poems he has written 

novels, essays and he has translated into Greek many great writers. He has received many 
literary honors. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

Ο Φίλιππος Δρακονταείδης γεννήθηκε το 1940. Πέρα από την ποίηση έχει γράψει 
νουβέλες, δοκίμια και μετέφρασε στα ελληνικά πολλούς ξένους μεγάλους συγγραφείς. Έχει 
λάβει πολλές λογοτεχνικές διακρίσεις. 

 
 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    155                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Herakles 
 

Ηρακλής 
 

Three nights have passed And midnight has yet to come. 
Time was shot on contact "Deceased while in service." At 

home dishes, books, soiled clothes Will be waiting for me As 
well as quite a few neatness-machines; And finally the smell of 
my activities In the bed satiation. When of course midnight 
comes I guess I'll bid the house farewell.Sounds of bells, 

matins, Dreams condensed into dreams: somewhere 
Day must be breaking now, twilight.With a strong push I'll rid 
myself of the tables And will strangle an infant though I am 

The snakes that coil around my arms. 
 
 

 
Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis 

 

 

Τρεις νύχτες περασμένες και τα μεσάνυχτα δεν 
φάνηκαν. Ό χρόνος πυροβολήθηκε εξ επαφής 

«απεβίωσε διατελών εν υπηρεσία». Στο σπίτι θα με 
προσμένουν πιάτα, βιβλία, ρούχα άπλυτα κι αρκετές 
μηχανές ευπρεπισμού και τέλος ή μυρουδιά των 

ενεργειών μου 
στο κρεββάτι κορεσμός. Όταν βέβαια φανούν τα 
μεσάνυχτα νομίζω ότι θ' αποχαιρετήσω το σπίτι. 

Φωνές καμπάνας, όρθροι, όνειρα συμπυκνωμένα σ' 
όνειρα: κάπου θα ξημερώνει τώρα, λυκαυγές. 

Μ' ένα γερό σπρώξιμο θ' απαλλαγώ από τα τραπέζια 
και θα πνίξω σ' αύτη τη νηπιακή ηλικία τα φίδια πού 

μου τυλίγουνε τα χέρια. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    156                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhrosinis Yioryos (1859-1951) 
 

 
 

 

Drosinis Yioryos was born in Plaka, Athens on 1859, however, his family hailed from 
Mesolonghi. His grandfather was killed during the siege of that famous city in the Greek War 

of Independence (1821 - 1829). He was one of several poets (Kostis Palamas, Ioannis 
Polemis) who transformed Greek poetry, during the 1880s, from the overly-romantic, 

oratorial-written verses to a more down-to-Earth, every-day-life blend, in the language of the 
common people. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιώργος Δροσίνης γεννήθηκε στην Πλάκα, στην Αθήνα το 1859, αλλά η καταγωγή της 
οικογένειάς του ήταν το Μεσολόγγι. Ο παππούς του είχε σκοτωθεί κατά την πολιορκία του 
Μεσολογγίου στη διάρκεια της Επανάστασης του 1821. Υπήρξε ένας από τους ποιητές που 

αναμόρφωσαν την ελληνική ποίηση, κατά τη δεκαετία του 1880, μεταβαίνοντας από τον 
Ρομαντισμό και την καθαρεύουσα σε μια πιο προσγειωμένη καθημερινή γλώσσα των απλών 

ανθρώπων.  
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    157                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The death of the Swan 
 

Ο θάνατος του Κύκνου 
 

Where the black coot and the wild duck find a wintering place 
upon the sunny land, White Swan of the north, what did you 

seek to pluck by the lagoon's decaying water edge and 
sand? 

The world-seducing Swan, by a lagoon Mermaid had been 
seduced Freedom she was called; For her palace on earth the 

battery had made, bedecked not like a bride but in a 
panoply bold. The White Swan then tried an eagle's form to 
take, eagle-like wings and talons stretching for her sake; but 

his foolhardy attempt proved to be fatal . . .  And when, in 
mid spring, the waterfowl flew forth returning to the far 

distant shore of the north, an   escort they became to the 
Swan's funeral . . . 

 
 

 
Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis 

 

 

Εκεί πού ή μαύρη φαλαρίδα κι ή άγρια πάπια χειμαδιό 
βρίσκουν στην προσηλιακή στεριά, στης 

λιμνοθάλασσας τ' ακρόνερα τα σάπια τι ήρθες 
ζητώντας, λευκέ Κύκνε, του βοριά; Τον Κύκνο 

κοσμοπλάνευτη πλάνεψε κάποια της λιμνοθάλασσας 
νεράιδα, ή Λευτεριά· Παλάτι στεριανό του κάστρου είχε 

την τάπια, κι αντί στολίδια νύφης, άρματα βαριά. 
Αητός ο λευκός κύκνος θέλησε να γίνει, κι αητού 

φτερά και νύχια τάνυσε για κείνη· μα ήταν θανάσιμη ή 
παράτολμη του ορμή . . . Και τα μαγιάπριλα όταν 
γύριζαν και πάλι τα νεροπούλια προς το βοριανό 

ακρογιάλι, συνοδιά γίνηκαν στου Κύκνου το κορμί . . . 
 
 

 

 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    158                            

 

  

[Index] 

Engonopoulos Nikos (1910-1985) 
 

 
 

 
Engonopoulos Nikos was born on 1910 in Athens and died there on 1985. Ranks as 

the foremost surrealist painter of Greece, represented by 74 canvases in the Biennale 
Exhibition of Modern and Fantastic Art in Venice in 1954. He became Professor of Art in the 
School of Architecture of the Technical Institute of Athens, has had many exhibits of his 
paintings in Greece and abroad, and has designed costumes and sets for many theater 
productions in Greece. In 1957 and again in 1978 he won the First State Prize in Poetry, and 
was twice decorated by the Greek Government. His effort is toward self-expression, no matter 
what that may involve. If he finds himself without colors, he will turn to word, to action. He 
believes that the more personal a work of art, the more universal its significance; that the 
fundamental thing is the responsible presences of a man in a work of art, which he defines as 
the expression of loneliness. He therefore believes in revolution in the name of tradition. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Νίκος Εγγονόπουλος γεννήθηκε στην Αθήνα το 1910. Θεωρείται ένας από τους πιο 

σουρεαλιστές ζωγράφους της Ελλάδας και υπήρξε καθηγητής Τέχνης στην Αρχιτεκτονική 
σχολή του Πολυτεχνίου Αθηνών. Έκανε πολλές εκθέσεις των πινάκων του στην Ελλάδα και 
το εξωτερικό και είχε σχεδιάσει κοστούμια για πολλές θεατρικές παραγωγές στην Ελλάδα. To 
1957 και το 1978 κέρδισε το Πρώτο Κρατικό Βραβείο Ποίησης. Κύριο μέλημα του, μέσα από 
το έργο του, υπήρξε η αυτο-έκφραση και όταν τα χρώματα δεν του αρκούσαν στρεφόταν στο 
λόγο και την ποίηση. Πίστευε ότι όσο πιο προσωπικό είναι ένα έργο τέχνης τόσο πιο 
καθολική η σημασία του, πως το πιο θεμελιώδες είναι η υπεύθυνη παρουσία του ανθρώπου 
σ’ένα έργο τέχνης, κάτι που ονομάζει ως έκφραση μοναξιάς. Πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1985.  

 
 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    159                            

 

  

[Index] 

Bolivar 

(1944) 

Μπολιβάρ 

 (1944) 
 

 

For the great, the free, the brave, the strong, 
The fitting words are great and free and brave and strong, 
For them, the total subjection of every element, silence, for 
them tears, for them beacons, and olive branches, and the 

lanternsThat bob up and down with the swaying of the ships 
and scrawl on the harbours’ dark horizons, For them are the 

empty barrels piled up in the narrowest lane, again of the 
harbor, For them the coils of white rope, the chains, the 

anchors, the other manometers, Amidst the irritating smell of 
petroleum, That they might fit out a ship, put to sea and 

depart, Like a tram setting off, empty and ablaze with light, 
in the nocturnal serenity of the gardens, With one purpose 
behind the voyage: ad astra. For them I’ll speak fine words, 
dictated to me by Inspiration’s  Muse, As she nestled deep 

in my mind full of emotion For the figures, austere and 
magnificent, of Odysseus Androutsos and Simon Bolivar. 
But for now I’ll sing only of Simon, leaving the other for an 

appropriate time, Leaving him that I might dedicate, then the 
time comes, perhaps the finest song that I’ve ever sung, 

Perhaps the finest song that’s ever been sung in the whole 
world. And this not for what they both were for their 

countries, their nations, their people, and other such like 
that fail to 

inspire, But because they remained throughout the ages, 
both of them, alone always, and free, great, brave and 

strong. And shall I now despair that to this very day no one 
has understood, has wanted, has been able to understand 
what I say? Shall the fate then be the same for what I say 
now of Bolivar,  that I’ll say tomorrow of Androutsos? 

Besides, it’s no easy thing for figures of the importance of  
Androutsos and Bolivar to be so quickly understood, 

Symbols of a like. But let’s move on quickly: for Heaven’s 
sake, no emotion, exaggeration or despair. Of no concern, 

my voice was destined for the ages alone. (In the future, the 

 
Για τους μεγάλους, για τους ελεύθερους, για τους 
γενναίους, τους δυνατούς, Αρμόζουν τα λόγια τα 

μεγάλα, τα ελεύθερα, τα γενναία, τα δυνατά, Γι' αυτούς 
η απόλυτη υποταγή κάθε στοιχείου, η σιγή, γι' αυτούς 
τα δάκρυα, γι' αυτούς οι φάροι, κι' οι κλάδοι ελιάς, και 

τα φανάρια 
Όπου χοροπηδούνε με το λίκνισμα των καραβιών και 
γράφουνε στους σκοτεινούς ορίζοντες των λιμανιών, Γι' 
αυτούς είναι τ' άδεια βαρέλια που σωριαστήκανε στο 
πιο στενό, πάλι του λιμανιού, σοκάκι, Γι' αυτούς οι 

κουλούρες τ' άσπρα σκοινιά, κι οι αλυσίδες, οι άγκυρες, 
τ' άλλα μανόμετρα, Μέσα στην εκνευριστικιάν οσμήν 

του πετρελαίου, Για ν' αρματώσουνε καράβι, ν' 
ανοιχτούν, να φύγουνε, Όμοιοι με τραμ που ξεκινάει, 
άδειο κι' ολόφωτο μέσ' στη νυχτερινή γαλήνη των 
μπαχτσέδων,  Μ' ένα σκοπό του ταξειδιού: προς τ' 

άστρα. Γι' αυτούς θα πω τα λόγια τα ωραία, που μου τα 
υπαγόρευσε η Έμπνευσις, Καθώς εφώλιασε μέσα στα 
βάθια του μυαλού μου όλο συγκίνηση Για τις μορφές, 

τις αυστηρές και τις υπέροχες, του Οδυσσέα 
Ανδρούτσου και του Σίμωνος Μπολιβάρ. Όμως για 

τώρα θα ψάλω μοναχά τον Σίμωνα, αφήνοντας τον άλλο 
για κατάλληλο καιρό, Αφήνοντάς τον για ναν τ' 
αφιερώσω, σαν έρθ' η ώρα, ίσως το πιο ωραίο 

τραγούδι που έψαλα ποτέ, Ίσως τ' ωραιότερο τραγούδι 
που ποτές εψάλανε σ' όλο τον κόσμο. Κι' αυτά όχι για 
τα ότι κι' οι δυο τους υπήρξαν για τις πατρίδες, και τα 
έθνη, και τα σύνολα, κι άλλα παρόμοια, που δεν 

εμπνέουν,  
Παρά γιατί σταθήκανε μέσ' στους αιώνες, κι οι δυο 

τους, 
μονάχοι πάντα, κι' ελεύθεροι, μεγάλοι, γενναίοι και 

δυνατοί. Και τώρα ν' απελπίζουμαι που ίσαμε σήμερα 
δεν με κατάλαβε, δεν θέλησε, δε μπόρεσε να καταλάβη 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    160                            

 

  

near, the distant, in years to come, a few,  many, perhaps 
from the day after tomorrow or the day  

after that, Until the time that, empty and useless and dead, 
the Earth begins to drift in the firmament, The young, with 
mathematical precision, will awake in their beds on wild 

nights, Moistening their pillows with tears, wondering at who 
I was,  

Reflecting That once I existed, what words I said, what 
songs I sang. And the gigantic waves that every evening 

break on Hydra’s seven shores, And the savage rocks, and 
the high mountain that brings down the blizzards, Will 

eternally and untiringly thunder my name.) But let’s get back 
to Simon Bolivar.Bolivar! A name of metal and wood, you 

were a flower in the gardens of South America.You had all 
the gentleness of flowers in your heart, in your hair, in your 
gaze. Your hand was huge like your heart, and scattered 
both good and evil. You swept through the mountains and 

the stars trembled, you  came down to the plains, with your 
gold finery, your  

epaulets, all the insignia of your rank, With a rifle hanging 
on your shoulder, with chest bared, with your body covered 

in wounds, And stark naked you sat on a low rock, at the 
sea’s edge, And they came and painted you in the ways of 

Indian braves, With wash, half white, half blue, so you’d 
appear like a lonely chapel on one of Attica’s shores, Like a 
church in the districts of Tatavla, like a palace in a deserted 
Macedonian town. Bolivar! You were reality, and you are, 

even now, you are no dream. When the wild hunters nail the 
wild eagles, and the other wild birds and animals, Over their 
wooden doors in the wild forests, You live again, and shout, 

and grieve, 
And you are yourself the hammer, nail and eagle. If on the 

isles of coral, winds blow and the empty fishing boats  
overturn, And the parrots are a riot of voices when the day 
ends and the gardens grow quiet drowned in humidity, And 

in the tall trees the crows perch, Consider, beside the 
waves, the iron tables of the cafeneion, How the damp eats 
at them in the gloom, and far off the light that flashes on, off, 

τι λέω, κανείς; Βέβαια την ίδια τύχη να χουνε κι αυτά 
που λέω τώρα για τον Μπολιβάρ, που θα πω αύριο για 

τον Ανδρούτσο; Δεν είναι κι' εύκολο, άλλωστε, να 
γίνουν τόσο γλήγορα αντιληπτές μορφές της σημασίας 
τ' Ανδρούτσου και του Μπολιβάρ, Παρόμοια σύμβολα. 

Αλλ' ας περνούμε γρήγορα: προς Θεού, όχι 
συγκινήσεις, κι' υπερβολές, κι' απελπισίες. Αδιάφορο, η 
φωνή μου είτανε προωρισμένη μόνο για τους αιώνες. 
(Στο μέλλον, το κοντινό, το μακρυνό, σε χρόνια, λίγα, 
πολλά, ίσως από μεθαύριο, κι' ντιμεθαύριο, Ίσαμε την 

ώρα που θε ν' αρχινίση η Γης να κυλάη άδεια, κι' 
άχρηστη, και νεκρή, στο στερέωμα,  

Νέοι θα ξυπνάνε, με μαθηματικήν ακρίβεια, τις άγριες 
νύχτες, πάνω στην κλίνη τους, Να βρέχουνε με δάκρυα 
το προσκέφαλό τους, αναλογιζόμενοι ποιος είμουν, 
κεφτόμενοι Πως υπήρξα κάποτες, τι λόγια είπα, τι 

ύμνους έψαλα. Και τα θεόρατα κύματα, όπου ξεσπούνε 
κάθε βράδυ στα εφτά της Ύδρας ακρογιάλια, Κι' οι 
άγριοι βράχοι, και το ψηλό βουνό που κατεβάζει τα 

δρολάπια,  
Αέναα, ακούραστα, θε να βροντοφωνούνε τ' όνομά μου.) 

Ας επανέλθουμε όμως στον Σίμωνα Μπολιβάρ. 
Μπολιβάρ ! Όνομα από μέταλλο και ξύλο, είσουνα Ένα 
λουλούδι μέσ' στους μπαχτσέδες της Νότιας Αμερικής. 
Είχες όλη την ευγένεια των λουλουδιών μέσ' στην 
καρδιά σου, μέσ' στα μαλλιά σου, μέσα στο βλέμμα 

σου. Η χέρα σου είτανε μεγάλη σαν την καρδιά σου, και 
σκορπούσε το καλό και το κακό.  Ροβόλαγες τα βουνά 
κι' ετρέμαν τ' άστρα, κατέβαινες στους κάμπους, με τα 

χρυσά, τις επωμίδες, 
όλα τα διακριτικά του βαθμού σου, Με το ντουφέκι στον 

ώμο αναρτημένο, με τα στήθια ξέσκεπα, με τις 
λαβωματιές γιομάτο το κορμί σου, Κι' εκαθόσουν 
ολόγυμνος σε πέτρα χαμηλή, στ' ακροθαλάσσι, Κι' 

έρχονταν και σ' έβαφαν με τις συνήθειες των 
πολεμιστών Ινδιάνων, Μ' ασβέστη, μισόνε άσπρο, μισό 
γαλάζιο, για να φαντάζης σα ρημοκκλήσι σε περιγιάλι 

της Αττικής, Σαν εκκλησιά στις γειτονιές των 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    161                            

 

  

on again, turning back and forth. And day breaks – what 
frightful anguish – after a night without sleep, And the water 

reveals nothing of its secrets. Such is life. And the sun 
comes, and the houses on the wharf, with their island-style 

arches, Painted pink, and green, with white sills (Naxos, 
Chios), How they live! How they shine like translucent 

fairies! Such is  
Bolivar! Bolivar! I cry out your name, reclining on the eak of  

Mount Ere, The highest peak on the isle of Hydra. From 
here the view, enchanting, extends as far as the Saronic 
isles, Thebes, Beyond Monemvasia, far below, to august 

Egypt, And as far as Panama, Guatemala, Nicaragua, 
Honduras, Haiti, San Domingo, Bolivia, Colombia, Peru, 
Venezuela, Chile, Argentina, Brazil, Uraguay, Paraguay, 
Ecuador, as far even as Mexico. With hard stone I carve 

your name in rock, that afterwards men may come in 
pilgrimage. 

As I carve sparks fly – such, they say, was Bolivar – and I 
watch my hand as it writes, gleaming in the sun. 

You saw the light for the first time in Caracas. Your light, 
Bolivar, for before you came the whole of South America 

was plunged in bitter darkness. Now your name is a blazing 
torch, lighting America, North and South, and all the world! 

The Amazon and Orinoco rivers spring from your eyes. 
The high mountains are rooted in your breast, 

The Andes range is your backbone. On the crown of your 
head, brave palikar, run unbroken stallions and wild cattle, 
The wealth of Argentina. On your belly sprawl vast coffee 
plantations. When you speak, terrible earthquakes spread 

devastation, From Patagonia’s formidable deserts as far as 
the colourful islands, Volcanoes erupt in Peru and vomit 

their wrath in the heavens, Everywhere the earth trembles 
and the icons creak in Kastoria, The silent town beside the 

lake.  
Bolivar, you have the beauty of a Greek.  

I first encountered you, as a child, in one of Phanar’s steep  
cobbled streets, A lighted lamp in Mouchlio illumined your 

noble face. Are you, I wonder, one of the myriad forms 

Ταταούλων, ωσάν ανάχτορο σε πόλη της Μακεδονίας 
ερημική. Μπολιβάρ! Είσουνα πραγματικότητα, και είσαι, 

και τώρα, δεν είσαι όνειρο. Όταν οι άγριοι κυνηγοί 
καρφώνουνε τους άγριους αετούς, και τ' άλλα άγρια 
πουλιά και ζώα, Πάν' απ' τις ξύλινες τις πόρτες στ' 

άγρια δάση, Ξαναζής, και φωνάζεις, και δέρνεσαι, Κι' 
είσαι ο ίδιος εσύ το σφυρί, το καρφί, κι' ο αητός. Αν στα 

νησιά των κοραλλιών φυσούνε ανέμοι, κι' 
αναποδογυρίζουνε τα έρημα καΐκια, Κι' οι παπαγάλοι 
οργιάζουνε με τις φωνές σαν πέφτει η μέρα, κι' οι κήποι 
ειρηνεύουνε πνιγμένοι σ' υγρασία, Και στα ψηλά δέντρα 
κουρνιάζουν τα κοράκια, Σκεφτήτε, κοντά στο κύμα, του 
καφφενείου τα σιδερένια τα τραπέζια, Μέσ' στη μαυρίλα 
πώς τα τρώει τ' αγιάζι, και μακριά το φως π' ανάβει, 
σβήνει, ξανανάβει, και γυρνάει πέρα δώθε, Και 

ξημερώνει --- τι φριχτή αγωνία --- ύστερα από μια νύχτα 
δίχως ύπνο,  

Και το νερό δεν λέει τίποτε από τα μυστικά του. 
Έτσ' η ζωή. Κι' έρχετ' ο ήλιος, και της προκυμαίας τα 
σπίτια, με τις νησιώτικες καμάρες, Βαμμένα ροζ, και 
πράσινα, μ' άσπρα περβάζια (η Νάξο, η Χίος), Πώς 
ζουν! Πώς λάμπουνε σα διάφανες νεράιδες ! Αυτός ο 

Μπολιβάρ! Μπολιβάρ ! Κράζω τ' όνομά σου 
ξαπλωμένος στην κορφή του βουνού Έρε, την πιο ψηλή 

κορφή της νήσου Ύδρας. Από δω η θέα εκτείνεται 
μαγευτική μέχρι των νήσων του Σαρωνικού, τη Θήβα, 
Μέχρι κει κάτω, πέρα απ' τη Μονεβασιά, το τρανό 

Μισίρι, Αλλά και μέχρι του Παναμά, της Γκουατεμάλα, 
της Νικαράγκουα, του Οντουράς, της Αϊτής, του Σαν 

Ντομίγκο, της Βολιβίας, της Κολομβίας, του Περού, της 
Βενεζουέλας, της  Χιλής, της Αργεντινής, της Βραζιλίας, 
Ουρουγουάη, Παραγουάη, του Ισημερινού, Ακόμη και 

του Μεξικού. Μ' ένα σκληρό λιθάρι χαράζω τ' όνομά σου 
πάνω στην πέτρα, νάρχουνται αργότερα οι ανθρώποι 
να προσκυνούν. Τινάζονται σπίθες καθώς χαράζω --- 
έτσι είτανε, λεν, ο Μπολιβάρ --- και παρακολουθώ Το 
χέρι μου καθώς γράφει, λαμπρό μέσα στον ήλιο. Είδες 
για πρώτη φορά το φως στο Καρακάς. Το φως το δικό 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    162                            

 

  

assumed, and successively discarded by Constantine 
Palaeologus? Boyaca, Ayacucho. Ideas both illustrious and 
eternal. I was there. We’d already left the old frontiers far 

behind: Back in the distance, fires were burning in Leskovik. 
And in the night, the army moved up towards the battle, its 
familiar sounds could already be heard. Opposite, a grim 

Convoy of endless trucks returned with the wounded. Don’t 
anyone be alarmed. Down there, see, the lake. This is the 
way they'll come, beyond the rushes. The roads have been 

mined: the work and repute of that Hormovo man, 
renowned, unrivalled in such matters. Everyone to their 

stations. The histle’s sounding! Come on, come on. Get the 
cannons uncoupled and set up, clean the barrels with the 
swabs, fuses lit and held ready, Cannon-balls to the right. 

Vrass! Vrass, Albanian for fire: Bolivar! Every pineapple that 
was hurled and exploded, Was a rose to the glory of the 

great general, As he stood, stern and unshaken, amid the 
dust and tumult, Gazing on high, his forehead in the clouds, 

And the sight of him caused dread: fount of awe, path of  
justice, gate of salvation. Yet, how many conspired against 
you, Bolivar, How many traps did they not set for you to fall 
into and vanish, One man, above all, a rogue, a snake, a 
native of Philippoupolis. But what was that to you, like a 
tower you stood firm, upright, before Acongagua’s terror, 
Holding a mighty cudgel and wielding it above your head. 

The bald-headed condors, unafraid of the carnage and 
smoke of battle, took fright and flew up in terrified flocks, 

And the llamas hurled themselves down the mountain 
slopes, dragging, as they fell, a cloud of earth and rocks. 

And into the dark of Tartarus your enemies disappeared, lay  
low. (When the marble arrives, the best from Alabanda, I’ll 

sprinkle my brow with Blachernae’s holy water, I’ll use all my 
craft to hew your stance, to erect the statue of a new Kouros 
in Sikynos’ mountains, Not forgetting, of course, to engrave 

on its base that famous “Hail, passer-by”.) And here it 
should above all be stressed that Bolivar was never afraid, 
never, as they say, “lost his nerve”, Not even at the most 

murderous hour of battle, nor in the bitter gloom of 

σου, Μπολιβάρ, γιατί ως νάρθης η Νότια Αμερική 
ολόκληρη είτανε βυθισμένη στα πικρά σκοτάδια.  
Τ' όνομά σου τώρα είναι δαυλός αναμμένος, που 

φωτίζει την Αμερική, και τη Βόρεια και τη Νότια, και την 
οικουμένη! Οι ποταμοί Αμαζόνιος και Ορινόκος 

πηγάζουν από τα μάτια σου. Τα ψηλά βουνά έχουν τις 
ρίζες στο στέρνο σου, Η οροσειρά των Άνδεων είναι η 

αχοκοκκαλιά σου. Στην κορφή της κεφαλής σου, 
παλληκαρά, τρέχουν 

τ' ανήμερα άτια και τ' άγρια βόδια, Ο πλούτος της 
Αργεντινής. Πάνω στην κοιλιά σου εκτείνονται οι 
απέραντες φυτείες του καφφέ. Σαν μιλάς, φοβεροί 

σεισμοί ρημάζουνε το παν, Από τις επιβλητικές ερημιές 
της Παταγονίας μέχρι τα πολύχρωμα νησιά, Ηφαίστεια 
ξεπετιούνται στο Περού και ξερνάνε στα ουράνια την 
οργή τους, Σειούνται τα χώματα παντού και τρίζουν τα 
εικονίσματα στην Καστοριά, Τη σιωπηλή πόλη κοντά 
στη λίμνη. Μπολιβάρ, είσαι ωραίος σαν Έλληνας. Σε 

πρωτοσυνάντησα, σαν είμουνα παιδί, σ' ένα ανηφορικό 
καλντιρίμι του Φαναριού, Μια καντήλα στο Μουχλιό 
φώτιζε το ευγενικό πρόσωπό σου. Μήπως νάσαι, 

άραγες, μια από τις μύριες μορφές που πήρε, κι' άφησε, 
διαδοχικά, ο Κωνσταντίνος Παλαιολόγος; Μπογιάκα, 
Αγιακούτσο. Έννοιες υπέρλαμπρες κι' αιώνιες. Είμουν 
εκεί. Είχαμε από πολλού περάσει, ήδη, την παλιά 

μεθόριο: πίσω, μακριά, στο Λεσκοβίκι, είχαν ανάψει 
φωτιές. Κι' ο στρατός ανέβαινε μέσα στη νύχτα προς τη 

μάχη, π' ακούγονταν κιόλα οι γνώριμοί της ήχοι.  
Πλάι κατέρχουνταν, σκοτεινή Συνοδεία, ατέλειωτα 

λεωφορεία με τους πληγωμένους. Μην ταραχθή κανείς. 
Κάτω εκεί, να, η λίμνη. Από δω θα περάσουν, πέρ' απ' 
τις καλαμιές. Υπομονευτήκαν οι δρόμοι : έργο και δόξα 
του Χορμοβίτη, του ξακουστού, του άφταστου στα 
τέτοια. Στις θέσεις σας όλοι. Η σφυρίχτρα ηχεί!  
Ελάτες, ελάτε, ξεζέψτε. Ας στηθούν τα κανόνια, 

καθαρίστε με τα μάκτρα τα κοίλα, τα φυτίλια αναμμένα 
στα χέρια, Τα τόπια δεξιά. Βρας ! Βρας, αλβανιστί 

φωτιά : Μπολιβάρ! Κάθε κουμπαράς, π' 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    163                            

 

  

unavoidable treachery. 
They say he knew beforehand, with unimaginable precision, 

the day, the hour, even the second: the moment, Of the 
Great Battle that was for him alone, In which he himself 
would be army and enemy, both vanquished and victor, 

triumphant hero and sacrificial victim. (And the lofty spirit of 
such as Cyril Loukaris reared within him, How he calmly 

eluded the despicable plots of the Jesuits and that wretched 
man from Philippoupolis!) And if he was lost, if ever lost is 

such a one as Bolivar! who like Apollonius vanished into the 
heavens, Resplendent like the sun he disappeared, in 

unimaginable glory, behind the gentle mountains of Attica 
and the Morea. Invocation Bolivar! You are a son of Rigas 
Ferraios, Of Antonios Economou – so unjustly slain – and 

brother to Pasvantzoglou, The dream of the great 
Maximilien de Robespierre lives again on your brow, You 
are the liberator of South America. I don’t know how you 
were related, if one of your descendants was that other 

great American, the one from  
Montivideo,One thing alone is sure, that I am your son.  

If the night, slow in passing, Sends moons of old to console 
us, If in the wide plain phantom shades Burden flowing-

haired maidens with chains, The hour of victory, of triumph 
has come. On hollow skeletons of field marshal generals 
Cocked hats soaked in blood will be placed, And the red 

that was theirs before the sacrifice Will cover with rays the 
flag's lustre. the ploughs at the palms’ roots and the sun that 

rises resplendent amid trophies and birds and spears will 
announce as far as a tear rolls carried by the breeze to the 

sea’s depths the most terrible oath the more terrible 
darkness the terrible tale: Libertad Away with you curses, 
come near us no more, corazón, From the cradle to the 

stars, from the womb to the eyes, corazón, Where 
precipitous rocks, where volcanoes and seals, corazón, 

Where swarthy faces, thick lips and gleaming white teeth, 
corazón, Let the phallus be raised, the revels begin, with 
human sacrifice, dance, corazón, In a carnival of flesh, to 
our ancestors’ glory, corazón, That the seed of the new 

εξεσφενδονιζόταν κι' άναφτε, Είταν κι' ένα τριαντάφυλλο 
για τη δόξα του μεγάλου στρατηγού, Σκληρός ατάραχος 
ως στέκονταν μέσα στον κορνιαχτό και την αντάρα, Με 
το βλέμμ' ατενίζοντας προς τ' αψηλά, το μέτωπο στα 
νέφη, Κι' είταν η θέα του φριχτή: πηγή του δέους, του 
δίκιου δρόμος, λυτρώσεως πύλη. Όμως, πόσοι και 
πόσοι δε σ' επιβουλευτήκαν, Μπολιβάρ, Πόσα 

"ντολάπια" και δε σού 'στησαν να πέσης, να χαθής, 
Ένας προ πάντων, ένας παλιάνθρωπος, ένα σκουλήκι, 
ένας Φιλιππουπολίτης. Αλλά συ τίποτα, ατράνταχτος 
σαν πύργος στέκουσαν, όρθιος, στου Ακογκάγκουα 
μπρος τον τρόμο, Μια φοβερή ξυλάρα εκράταγες, και 

την εκράδαινες πάνω απ' την κεφαλή σου. Οι φαλακροί 
κόνδωρες σκιάζουνταν, που δεν τους τρόμαξε της μάχης 

το κακό και το ντουμάνι, 
και σε κοπάδια αγριεμένα πέταγαν, Κι' οι 

ροβατογκαμήλες γκρεμιοτσακίζουντάνε στις πλαγιές, 
σέρνοντας, καθώς πέφταν, σύννεφο το χώμα και 

λιθάρια. Κι' οι εχθροί σου μέσα στα μαύρα Τάρταρα 
εχάνοντο, λουφάζαν. (Σαν θάρθη μάρμαρο, το πιο καλό, 
από τ' Αλάβανδα, μ' αγίασμα των Βλαχερνών θα βρέξω 
την κορφή μου, Θα βάλω όλη την τέχνη μου αυτή τη 

στάση σου να πελεκήσω, να στήσω ενού νέου Κούρου 
τ' άγαλμα στης Σικίνου τα βουνά, Μη λησμονώντας, 
βέβαια, στο βάθρο να χαράξω το περίφημο εκείνο 

"Χαίρεπαροδίτα".) Κι' εδώ πρέπει ιδιαιτέρως να εξαρθή 
ότι ο Μπολιβάρδεν εφοβήθηκε, δε "σκιάχτηκε" που λεν, 
ποτέ, Ούτε στων μαχών την ώρα την πιο φονικιά, ούτε 

στης προδοσίας, της αναπόφευκτης, τις 
πικρέςμαυρίλες. Λένε πως γνώριζε από πριν, με μιαν 

ακρίβεια αφάνταστη, τη μέρα, την ώρα, το δευτερόλεφτο 
ακόμη: τη στιγμή, Της Μάχης της μεγάλης που είτανε γι' 
αυτόνα μόνο, Κι' όπου θε νάτανε αυτός ο ίδιος στρατός 

κι' εχθρός, ηττημένος και νικητής μαζί, ήρωας 
τροπαιούχος κι' εξιλαστήριο θύμα. (Και ως του 

Κύριλλου Λουκάρεως το πνεύμα το υπέροχομέσα του 
στέκονταν, Πώς τις ξεγέλαγε, γαλήνιος, των Ιησουιτώνε 

και του ελεεινού Φιλιππουπολίτη τις απαίσιες 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    164                            

 

  

generation be sown, corazón. 
Translated by:  David Connolly 

 

πλεχτάνες!) Κι' αν χάθηκε, αν ποτές χάνετ' ένας 
Μπολιβάρ ! που σαν τον Απολλώνιο στα ουράνια 
ανελήφθη, Λαμπρός σαν ήλιος έδυσε, μέσα σε δόξα 
αφάνταστη, πίσω από βουνά ευγενικά της Αττικής και 
του Μορέως. Μπολιβάρ ! Είσαι του Ρήγα Φερραίου 

παιδί, Του Αντωνίου Οικονόμου --- που τόσο άδικα τον 
σφάξαν --- και του Πασβαντζόγλου αδελφός,  

Τ' όνειρο του μεγάλου Μαξιμιλιανού ντε Ρομπεσπιέρ 
ξαναζεί στο μέτωπό σου. Είσαι ο ελευθερωτής της 

Νότιας Αμερικής. Δεν ξέρω ποια συγγένεια σε συνέδεε, 
αν είτανε απόγονός σου ο άλλος μεγάλος Αμερικανός, 
από το Μοντεβίντεο αυτός, Ένα μονάχα είναι γνωστό, 
πως είμαι ο γυιος σου. Αν η νύχτα, αργή να περάση, 
Παρηγόρια μάς στέλνει τις παλιές τις σελήνες, Αν στου 
κάμπου τα πλάτη φαντασμάτων σκοτάδια Λυσικόμους 
παρθένες μ' αλυσίδες φορτώνουν, Ήρθ' η ώρα της 
νίκης, ήρθε ώρα θριάμβου. Εις τα σκέλεθρα τ' άδεια 
στρατηγών πολεμάρχων Τρικαντά θα φορέσουν που 

ποτίστηκαν μ' αίμα, Και το κόκκινο χρώμα πούχαν πριν 
τη θυσία Θα σκεπάση μ' αχτίδες της σημαίας το 

θάμπος. αντιστροφή τ' άροτρα στων φοινικιών τις ρίζες 
κι' ο ήλιος που λαμπρός ανατέλλει σε τρόπαι' ανάμεσα 
και πουλιάκαι κοντάρια θ' αναγγείλη ως εκεί που κυλάει 
το δάκρυ και το παίρνει ο αέρας στης θαλάσσης τα 
βάθη τον φριχτότατον όρκοτο φρικτότερο σκότος το 
φριχτό παραμύθι : Φύγετε μακρυά μας αρές, μη 

ζυγώσετε πια, corazon, Απ' τα λίκνα στ' αστέρια, απ' τις 
μήτρες στα μάτια, corazon, Όπου απόγκρημνοι βράχοι 
και ηφαίστεια και φώκιες, corazon, Όπου πρόσωπο 
σκούρο, και χείλια πλατειά, κι ολόλευκα δόντια, 

corazon, Ας στηθεί ο φαλλός και γιορτή ας αρχίση, με 
θυσίες ανθρώπων, με χορούς, corazon,  

Μέσ' σε σάρκας ξεφάντωμα, στων προγόνων τη δόξα, 
corazon, Για να σπείρουν το σπόρο της καινούργιας 

γενιάς, corazon.  

 
[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    165                            

 

  

[Index] 

Elytis Odiysseus (1911-1996) 
 

 
 

 
Elytis Odysseus (Odhiseas Alepoudhelis) was born on 1911 in Iraklion, Crete, but has 

lived in Athens since 1914 where he died on 1996. Spending his summers in the Aegean 
islands and travelling extensively in Europe, the Soviet union, and the United States. During 
1948-51 he studied literature at the Sorbonne, associating closely with the poets and painters 
of the Parisian School, and wrote art criticism for Greek and French magazines, delving 
himself in watercolor, gauge, and primarily in collage. For 1959 he was given the First State 
Prize, in 1975 an Honorary Degree by the University of Thessaloniki, and. in 1980 by the 
University of London, in 1979 the Nobel Prize in Poetry. His early work marked the joyous 
return to nature, to summer and the sea, to the blaze of the noonday sun over the Aegean (his 
second book was entitled Sun the Frst), to the praise of adolescence and its sentiments. 
Although his poetry is highly rhythmical and subtely orchestrated and, of late, highly, 
organized, he is mostly interested in the plastic use of language and imagery. His experience 
on the Albanian front as a second lieutenant during the war with Italy brought greater depth 
and sobriety to his poetry, enlarged his horizons to a national consciousness, that comes to 
terms with evil and tragedy in the world, yet still affirms, with stoic courage. This later phase 
is embodied in his epico-lyrical poem Axion Esti (Worthy it  Is), in which he concludes that 
although we pay dearly for life it is worth the price. His subsequent poetry shows him 
confirmed in the magical nature of poetry. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 
Ο Οδυσσέας Ελύτης (Οδυσσέας Αλεπουδέλης) γεννήθηκε το 1911 στο Ηράκλειο 

Κρήτης αλλά έζησε την Αθήνα από το 1914 όπου και απεβίωσε το 1996. Περνούσε τα 
καλοκαίρια του στα νησιά του Αιγαίου και ταξίδεψε πολύ στην Ευρώπη, τη Σοβιετική Ένωση 
και τις ΗΠΑ. Το διάστημα 1948-51 σπούδασε λογοτεχνία στη Σορβόννη και συνδέθηκε 
στενά με ποιητές και ζωγράφους της Παρισινής Σχολής γράφοντας κριτική για ελληνικά και 
γαλλικά λογοτεχνικά περιοδικά.. Το 1959 του απενεμήθει το Πρώτο Κρατικό Βραβείο 
Λογοτεχνίας, το 1975 τιμητικός τίτλος από το Πανεπιστήμιο της Θεσσαλονίκης και το 1980 
από το Πανεπιστήμιο του Λονδίνου. Το 1979 κέρδισε το Νόμπελ Λογοτεχνίας  Το έργο του 
υμνεί την επιστροφή στη φύση, το καλοκαίρι και τη θάλασσα, τον ήλιο του Αιγαίου. Παρόλο 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    166                            

 

  

που η ποίησή του είναι έντονα ρυθμική και εκλεπτυσμένα ορχηστρική, και στο τέλος πολύ 
οργανωμένη, παρουσιάζει έντονο το ενδιαφέρον του ποιητή για μια πλαστική χρήση της 
γλώσσας με πολλά διανθίσματα. Η εμπειρία του στο Αλβανικό Μέτωπο στον πόλεμο με την 
Ιταλία, έδωσε μεγαλύτερο βάθος και νηφαλιότητα στην ποίηση του, διευρύνοντας τους 
ορίζοντές του προς μια εθνική συνείδηση που επιμένει στωϊκά ενάντια στο κακό και την 
παγκόσμια τραγωδία. Αυτή η τελευταία φάση του αποτυπώνεται έντονα στι επικο-λυρικό 
ποίημα του, Άξιον Εστί στο οποίο καταλήγει ότι το κόστος της ζωής αξίζει το τίμημα. Τέλος, 
στην κατοπινή του ποίηση ο ποιητής φαίνεται να επιβεβαιώνεται από τη μαγική φύση της 
ποίησης.  
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    167                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The sleep of the Brave 

(1953) 

 

Ο ύπνος των Γεναίων 

 (1953) 
 

They will smell of incense, and their faces are burnt by their 
crossing through the Great Dark Places. There where they 

were suddenly flung by the Immovable Face-down, on 
ground whose smallest anemone would suffice to turn the 

air of Hades bitter (One arm outstretched, as though 
straining to be grasped by the future, the other arm under 
the desolate head, turned on its side, As though to see for 

the last time, in the eyes of a disembowelled horse, the 
heap of smoking ruins) There time released them. One 

wing, the redder of the two, covered the world, while the 
other, delicate, already moved through space, No wrinkle or 

pang of conscience, but at a great depth The old 
immemorial blood that began painfully to etch, in the sky’s 

blackness, A new sun, not yet ripe, 
That couldn’t manage to dislodge the hoarfrost of lambs 

from live clover, but, before even casting a ray, could divine 
the oracles of Erebus... And from the beginning, Valleys, 
Mountains, Trees, Rivers, A creation made of vindicated 

feelings now shone, identical and reversed, there for them 
to cross now, with the Executioner inside them put to death, 
Villagers of the limitless blue: Neither twelve o’clock striking 

in the depths nor the voice of the pole falling from the 
heights retracted their footsteps.  They read the world 

greedily with eyes now open forever, there where they were 
suddenly flung by the Immovable, Face-down, and where 

the voltures fell upon them violently to enjoy the clay of their 
guts and their blood. 

 
Translated by:  Edmund Keeley & Philip Sherrard 

 

 

Μυρίζουν ακόμη λιβάνια, κι έχουν την όψη καμένη από 
το πέρασμά.τους στα Σκοτεινά Μεγάλα Μέρη. Κει που 
μεμιάς τους έριξε το Ασάλευτο Μπρούμυτα, σ' ένα χώμα 
που κι η πιο μικρή ανεμώνα του θα 'φτάνε να πικράνει 
τον αεράτου Αδη (Το 'ναχερι μπρος, έλεγες πολεμούσε ν 

'αρπαχτεί απ' το μέλλον, τ' άλλο κάτω απ' την έρμη 
κεφαλή, στραμμέ-νη με το πλάι, Σα να θωρεί στερνή 
φορά., μέσα στα μάτια ενός ξεκοιλιασμένου αλόγου, 

σωρό τα χαλάσματα καπνίζοντας) Κει τους απάλλαξε ο 
Καιρός. Η φτερούγα η μια, η πιο κόκκινη, κάλυψε τον 
κόσμο, την ώρα που η άλλη, α-βρή, σάλευε κιόλας μες 
στο διάστημα. Και καμιά ρυτίδα η τύψη, αλλά σε βάθος 
μέγα Το παλιό αμνημόνευτο αίμα που αρχινούσε με 
κόπο να χαράζεται, μέσα στη μελανάδα τ' ουρανού 
Ήλιος νέος, αγίνωτος ακόμη, Που δεν έσωνε να 
καταλύσει την πάχνη των αρνιών από το ζωντανό 

τριφύλλι, όμως πριν καν πετάξει αγκάθι 
αποχρησμοδοτούσε το έρεβος.... Κι απαρχής Κοιλάδες, 

Όρη, Δέντρα, Ποταμοί, Πλάση από γδικιωμένα 
αισθήματα έλαμπε, απαράλλαχτη και αναστραμμένη, να 
τη διαβαίνουν οι ίδιοι τώρα, με θανατωμένο μεσάτους 
το Δήμιο, Χωρικοί του απέραντου γαλάζιου! Μήτε η ώρα 
δώδεκα χτυπώντας μες στα έγκατα, μήτε η φωνή του 

Πόλου κατακόρυφα πέφτοντας, αναιρουσα-νέ τα βήματα 
του ς. Διάβαζαν άπληστα τον κόσμο με τά μάτια, τ' 
ανοιχτά για πάντα, κει που με μιας τους έριξε το 

Ασάλευτο Μπρούμυτα, κι όπου με βία κατέβαιναν οι 
γύπες να ευφρανθούν τον πηλό των σπλάχνων τους και 

το αίμα. 

 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    168                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Burnished day 

(1943) 

 

Μέρα στιλπνή 

 (1943) 
 

Burnished day, conch of the voice that fashioned me 
Naked, to step through my perpetual SundaysBetween the 
shores’ cries of welcome,Let your wind, known for the first 

time, blow freely Unfold a lawn of tenderness 
Where the sun can roll his head Can enflame the poppies 

with his kiss Poppies nourished by men so fine That the sole 
mark on their bare chests 

Is the blood of defiance that annuls sorrow 
And attains the remembrance of liberty. 

I spoke of love, of the rose’s health, of the ray 
That by itself goes straight to the heart, 

Of Greece that steps so surely on the sea 
Greece that carries me always Among naked  

snow-crowned mountains. I give my hand to justice 
Diaphanous fountain, sublimest spring, My sky is deep and 

changeless All I love is incessantly reborn 
All I love is always at its beginning. 

 
Translated by:  Edmund Keeley & Philip Sherrard 

 

 

Μέρα στιλπνή αχιβάδα της φωνής που μ' έπλασες 
Γυμνόν να περπατώ στις καθημερινές μου Κυριακές 
Ανάμεσ' από των γιαλών τα καλωσόρισες Φύσα τον 

πρωτογνώριστο άνεμο Απλωσε μια πρασιά στοργής Για 
να κυλήσει ο ήλιος το κεφάλι του Ν' ανάψει με τα χείλια 
του τις παπαρούνες Τις παπαρούνες που θα δρέψουν 
οι περήφανοι άνθρωποι Για να μην είναι άλλο σημάδι 
στο γυμνό τους στήθος Από το αίμα της αψηφισιάς που 

ξέγραψε τη θλίψη Φτάνοντας ως τη μνήμη της 
ελευθερίας. Είπα τον ερωτά την υγεία του ρόδου την 

αχτίδα Που μονάχη ολόισα βρίσκει την καρδιά 
Την Ελλάδα που με σιγουριά πατάει στη θάλασσα 

Την Ελλάδα που με ταξιδεύει πάντοτε 
Σε γυμνά χιονόδοξα βουνά. Δίνω το χέρι στη 

δικαιοσύνη Διάφανη κρήνη κορυφαία πηγή Ο ουρανός 
μου είναι βαθύς κι ανάλλαχτος 'Οτι αγαπώ γεννιέται 

αδιάκοπα 
Ότι αγαπώ βρίσκεται στην αρχή του πάντα. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    169                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Here then am I 

(1956-58) 

 

Ιδού εγώ λοιπόν 

 (1956-58) 
 

Here then am I created for the young Korai and  
the Aegean islands, lover of the deer’s leaping, 

initiate in the Mystery of olive leaves, 
sun-drinker and locust-killer. Here am I, face to face 

with the black shirts of the ruthless and of the years’ empty 
belly that aborted its own children, in heat! 

Wind releases the elements and thunder assaults the 
mountains. Fate of the innocent, alone again, here you  

are in the Straits! In the Straits I opened my hands. 
In the Straits I emptied my hands and saw no other riches, 

heard no other riches but cool fountains running. 
Pomegranates or Zephyr or Kisses. Each to his own  

weapons. I said: In the Straits I’ll open my pomegranates. In 
the Straits I’ll post Zephyrs as sentries. I’ll unleash the old 

kisses canonized by my longing! Wind releases the 
elements and thunder assaults the mountains. Fate of the 

innocent, you are my own Fate 
 

Translated by:  Edmund Keeley & George Savvidis 

 

 

Ιδού εγώ λοιπόν, ο πλασμένος για τις μικρές Κόρες και τα 
νησιά του Αιγαίου ο εραστής του σκιρτήματος των 

ζαρκαδιών και μύστης των φύλλων της ελιάς· ο ηλιοπότης 
και ακριδοκτόνος. Ιδού εγώ καταντικρύ του μελανού 

φορέματος των αποφασισμένων και της άδειας των ετών, 
που τα τέκνα της άμβλωσε, γαστέρας, το άγκρισμα! Λύνει 
αέρας τα στοιχεία και βροντή προσβάλλει τα βουνά. 
Μοίρα των αθώων, πάλι μόνη, να σε, στα Στενά! Στα Στενά 
τα χέρια μου άνοιξα Στα Στενά τα χέρια μου άδειασα κι 
άλλα πλούτη δεν είδα, κι άλλα πλούτη δεν άκουσα παρά 
βρύσες κρύες να τρέχουν Ρόδια ή Ζέφυρο ή Φιλιά. Ο 
καθείς και τα άπλα του, είπα: Στα Στενά τα ρόδια μου θ' 
ανοίξω Στα Στενά φρουρούς τους ζέφυρους θα στήσω τα 
φιλιά τα παλιά θ' απολύσω που η λαχτάρα μου άγιασε! 
Λύνει αέρας τα στοιχεία και βροντή προσβάλλει τα 
βουνά. Μοίρα των αθώων, είσαι η δική μου η Μοίρα! 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    170                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

They came 

(1956-58) 

 

Ήρθαν 

 (1956-58) 
 

Dressed up as “friends, ”came countless times, my enemies, 
trampling the primeval soil. And the soil never blended with 
their heel. They brought The Wise One, the Founder, and 
the Geometer, Bibles of letters and numbers, every kind of 

Submission and Power, to sway over the primeval light. 
And the light never blended with their roof. 

Not even a bee was fooled into beginning the golden game, 
not even a Zephyr into swelling the white aprons. On the 

peaks, in the valleys, in the ports they raised and founded 
mighty towers and villas, floating timbers and other vessels; 
and the Laws decreeing the pursuit of profit they applied to 
the primeval measure. And the measure never blended with 

their thinking. Not even a footprint of a god left a man on 
their soul, not even a fairy’s glance tried to rob them of their 

speech. They came dressed up as “friends,” 
came countless times, my enemies, bearing the primeval 

gifts. And their gifts were nothing else but iron and fire only. 
To the open expecting fingers only weapons and iron and 

fire. 
Only weapons and iron and fire. 

 
Translated by:  Edmund Keeley & George Savvidis 

 

 

Ντυμένοι «φίλοι» αμέτρητες φορές οι εχθροί μου το 
παμπάλαιο χώμα πατώντας. Και το χώμα δεν έδεσε 
ποτέ με τη φτέρνα τους. Έφεραν το Σοφό, τον Οικιστή 
και το Γεωμέτρη, Βίβλους γραμμάτων και αριθμών, την 

πάσα Υποταγή και Δύναμη, το παμπάλαιο φως 
εξουσιάζοντας. Και το φως δεν έδεσε ποτέ με τη σκεπή 

τους. Ούτε μέλισσα καν δεν γελάστηκε το χρυσό ν' 
αρχινίσει παιχνίδι ούτε ζέφυρος καν, τις λευκές να 
φουσκώσει ποδιές. Έστησαν και θεμελίωσαν 

στις κορφές, στις κοιλάδες, στα πόρτα πύργους 
κραταιούς κι επαύλεις ξύλα και άλλα πλεούμενα, τους 
Νόμους, τους θεσπίζοντας τα καλά και συμφέροντα, στο 

παμπάλαιο μέτρο εφαρμόζοντας. Και το μέτρο δεν έδεσε 
ποτέ με τη σκέψη τους. Ούτε καν ένα χνάρι θεού στην 
ψυχή τους σημάδι δεν άφησε· ούτε καν ένα βλέμμα 
ξωθιάς τη μιλιά τους δεν είπε να πάρει.Έφτασαν 

ντυμένοι «φίλοι» αμέτρητες φορές οι εχθροί μου, τα 
παμπάλαια δώρα προσφέροντας. Και τα δώρα τους 

άλλα δεν ήτανε παρά μόνο σίδερο και φωτιά. 
Στα ανοιχτά που καρτέραγαν δάχτυλα Μόνον όπλα και 
σίδερο και φωτιά. Μόνον όπλα και σίδερο και φωτιά. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    171                            

 

  

[Index] 

Embericos Andreas (1901 - 1975) 
 

 
 

 

Embericos Andreas was born on 1901 in Braila, Rumania, and died in Athens on 
August 5, 1975. Brought to Athens in infancy, he eventually worked in the London offices of 
his father's shipping firm, 1921-25, then gave up his shipping career and lived in France, 
1925-31, where he studied psychoanalysis and became a member of the surrealist group 
headed by Andre Breton. Returning to Greece in 1932 became the first Greek surrealist poet. 
His poems are often inspired by a frenetic, orgiastic, Dionysian ecstasy in an ultimate triumph 
of life, love, and a lust so cleansed of guilt and ethical distortions that it flows as from the 
pure springs of creation. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Ανδρέας Εμπειτίκος γεννήθηκε το 1901 στην Μπράιλα της Ρουμανίας και σε 
βρεφική ηλικία ήρθε στην Αθήνα. Δούλεψε στο Λονδίνο, στα γραφεία της ναυτιλιακής 
εταιρείας του πατέρα του από το 1921 έως το 1925 οπότε και εγκατέλειψε τα ναυτιλιακά για 
να μείνει στη Γαλλία μέχρι το 1931. Εκεί σπούδασε ψυχανάλυση και έγινε μέλος μιας 
σουρεαλιστικής ομάδας της οποίας ηγείτο ο Andre Breton. Με τον ερχομό του το 1932 στην 
Ελλάδα αποτέλεσε τον πρώτο σουρεαλιστή Έλληνα ποιητή. Πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1975. Τα 
ποιήματα του συχνά είναι εμπνευσμένα από μια φρενήρη, αργιώδη, διονυσιακή έκσταση από 
τον απόλυτο θρίαμβο της ζωής, της αγάπης και ενός πόθου τόσο απαλλαγμένου από ενοχές 
και ηθικές αναστολές που αναβλύζει από τις αγνές πηγές της δημιουργίας 

  

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    172                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Whale Light 

(1932) 

 

Φως επί Φάλαινας 

(1932) 
 

The initial form woman took was the braided throats of two 
dinosaurs. Later, time changed and woman changed too. 
She became smaller, more lithe, more in keeping with the 
two-masted (in some countries three-masted) ships that 

float on the misfortune of making a living. She herself floats 
on the scales of a cylinder-bearing dove of immense weight. 
Epochs change and the woman of our epoch resembles the 

gap in a filament. 
 

Translated by: Karen van Dyck   

 
Η αρχική μορφή της γυναίκας ήτο το πλέξιμο των 

λαιμών δυο δεινόσαυρων. Έκτοτε άλλαξαν οι καιροί και 
άλλαξε σχήμα η γυναίκα. Έγινε πιο μικρή πιο ρευστή 
πιο εναρμονισμένη με τα δικάταρτα (σε μερικές χώρες 

τρικάταρτα) καράβια που πλέουν επάνω από τη 
συμφορά της βιοπάλης Η ίδια πλέει επάνω στα λέπια 
ενός κυλινδροφόρου περιστεριού μακράς ολκής Οι 

εποχές αλλάζουν και η γυναίκα της εποχής μας μοιάζει 
με χάσμα θρυαλλίδος. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    173                            

 

  

[Index] 

Evangelou Anestis (1937 - 1994) 
 

 
 

 

Evangelou Anestis was born on 1937 in Thessaloniki and died there on 1994. There he 
completed his early education, including the American high school Anatolia. For a year he 
studied law at the University of Thessaloniki. In 1982 he attended the Poetry Festival in 
Strouga, Yugoslavia. The author of three books of prose sketches and essays, he has written 
seven books of poetry, and has been translated into English, Italian, Polish and Rumanian. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Ανέστης Ευαγγέλου γεννήθηκε το 1937 στη Θεσσαλονίκη. Τελείωσε το σχολείο 
στην Θεσσαλονίκη ενώ σπούδασε και έναν χρόνο στην Νομική του Πανεπιστημίου της 
πόλης. Το 1982 συμμετείχε στο Φεστιβάλ Ποίησης στη Στρούγγα της Γιουγκοσλαβίας. Έχει 
γράψει τρία βιβλία για θεατρικά σκετς και δοκίμια καθώς και επτά βιβλία ποίησης. Έργα του 
έχουν μεταφραστεί στα αγγλικά, Ιταλικά, Πολωνικά και Ρουμανικά.  

 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    174                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The First steps 

 

Τα πρώτα βήματα 
 

My friend, to get in here you've got to be distinguished to 
have great imagination, to be an artist. It's a delicate, 

scientific and difficult job, take it from me with my whitened 
hair. In the beginning, of course, it's a bit hard: screams 

pierce the eardrums and blood, warm and red, hurts your 
eyes. Well then: this is the crucial, the important moment: 

most people give up then and leave. Few stay. You yourself 
look good to me, you'll go places  —your eyes are gleaming. 
When, with the passing of time, you mature and become an 
expert in devices, when you refine your art and cleanse it of 

the stain of your latest hesitation and art remains for art's 
sake— remember me: it hides great delights. And now, 

come for me to show you one by one the tools of our trade 
and their uses. This pair of pincers is meant for fingernails. 

You see, quite blunt at its jaws so it won't clip them; made to 
order. You get hold of the fingernail, you press it hard and 

pull it. Wonderful tool, most handy. 
 

Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis   

 

Φίλε μου, εδώ για να 'μπεις πρέπει να 'σαι εκλεκτός, να 
'χεις μεγάλη φαντασία, να 'σαι καλλιτέχνης. Είναι λεπτή, 
επιστημονική και δύσκολη δουλειά, στο λέω εγώ πού 
άσπρισαν τα μαλλιά μου. Στην αρχή, βέβαια, είναι λιγάκι 

δύσκολο: τρυπούν τα τύμπανα οι κραυγές και το αίμα, ζεστό 
και κόκκινο, τα μάτια σου πληγώνει. Λοιπόν, εδώ είν' ή 
κρίσιμη στιγμή, ή μεγάλη: οι πιο πολλοί τα παρατούν και 
φεύγουν. Μένουνε λίγοι. Ελόγου σου μου φαίνεσαι 

καλός, θα προοδέψεις —λάμπουν τα μάτια σου. Όταν, με 
του καιρού το πέρασμα, ωριμάσεις και γίνεις άσος στις 
επινοήσεις, όταν την τέχνη σου εκλεπτύνεις και την 

καθαρίσεις απ' τη βρωμιά του τελευταίου σου 
δισταγμού και μείνει ή τέχνη για την τέχνη— θυμήσου 
με: κρύβει μεγάλες ηδονές. Και τώρα, έλα να σου δείξω ένα 
ένα τα εργαλεία της δουλειάς μας και τη χρήση τους. 
Αυτή ή τανάλια είναι για τα νύχια. Βλέπεις, διόλου 
κοφτερή στις άκρες ώστε να μην τα κόβει· είδική 

παραγγελία. Πιάνεις γερά το νύχι, το σφίγγεις δυνατά και 
το τραβάς. Θαυμάσιο εργαλείο, πρακτικό. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    175                            

 

  

[Index] 

Thasites Panos (1923) 
 

 
 

Panos Thasites was born in Molyvos of Mitilini island, Greece on 1923. He studied and 
practiced law in Thessaloniki. His first appereance as a poet had been the poem “Without 

Ark” in 1952 with very promising lyrics. With his collections “Pragmata” (Things) and 
“Pragmata II” he describes clearly the social adventure as seen by the poet himself. In 1971 

the poem "Ekatonisos" erotic memories engage with a traumatic today, whereas in the second 
part of the collection, “Eleinon Theatron…” (“Miserable Theater…”), the reader encounters a 

bitter, sarcastic and many times self-sarcastic poertry. 

 
 [Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Πάνος Θασίτης γεννήθηκε στο Μόλυβο της Μυτιλήνης το 1923,σπούδασε Νομικά 
στο Πανεπιστήμιο Θεσσαλονίκης και άσκησε δικηγορία στη Θεσσαλονίκη. Εμφανίστηκε 
ποιητικά με τη συλλογή "Δίχως Κιβωτό" και στίχους που δίναν μόνον υποσχέσεις. Μόνον με 
τα "Πράγματα" και κυρίως με τα "Πράγματα 2 - Αριθμοί" θα μιλήσει πιο ξεκάθαρα για την 
κοινωνική μας περιπέτεια, όπως βιώθηκε στον ποιητή. Το 1971 στην "Εκατόνησο" ερωτικές 
μνήμες συμπλέκονται με ένα τραυματικό παρόν, ενώ στο δεύτερο μέρος της συλλογής, (το 
"Ελεεινόν θέατρον...") έχουμε πια πικρή, σαρκαστική ποίηση που πολλές φορές φτάνει στον 
αυτοσαρκασμό. 

 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    176                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

They should’ve given in a litle 

 

Ας υποχωρούσαν λίγο 
 

They Should've Given In A Little What do these people want 
now, and get us angry? What's this nonsense they mouth 
again about, supposedly, hazy deals And unlawful gains? 
They are rude and envious, third-generation paupers, 

Starving and rightly so, considering who they are They don't even 
know what life means -They take it easy, begging for a living 
-And now they pretend to be righteous, They act like a bunch 

of Robespierres! After all, they too should've been 
enterprizing, Should've given in a little, should've been flexible 

a bit, Should've seized opportunities, should've pushed and 
stepped 

on others when needed After all, nobody has ever forbidden 
these things. All of us manage to live with them and make 

do. 
Are they posing to us as wise guys, now? 

 

Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis   

 

Τι θέλουν τώρα αυτοί και μας θυμώνουν; 
Τι κουταμάρες λένε πάλι για δήθεν υπόπτους 
συνδυασμούς γι ' ανόμως κερδισμένα; Είναι 

ζηλιάρηδες, ανάγωγοι, ξυπόλητοι πάππου προς 
πάππον, πεινασμένοι και δικαίως τέτοιοι πού 'ναι  δεν ξέρουν 
τι θα πει ζωή την πήρανε στα εύκολα ψωμοζητώντας και 

τώρα κάνουν τους ενάρετους, 
παίζουν τους Ροβεσπιέρους! Στο κάτω - κάτω, αν ήταν 
ικανοί κι αυτοί, ας υποχωρούσαν λίγο, ας ελίσσονταν 

λιγάκι, ας άρπαζαν τις ευκαιρίες, ας σπρώχναν κι ας 
πατούσαν στην ανάγκη αφού κανείς δεν τ 'απαγόρεψε 

αυτά όλοι με κάτι τέτοια ζούμε και περνούμε 
Τους έξυπνους μας κάνουν τώρα; 

 

 

[Index]   [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    177                            

 

  

[Index] 

Τhemelis Yioryos (1900 - 1976) 
 

 
 

 

Themelis Yioryos was born on 1900 on the island of Samos and died on 1976 in 
Thessaloniki. He received his degree, in literature from the University of Tessaloniki in 1925 
and began teaching Greek language and literature in various high schools. In addition to his 
poetry he has translated ancient Greek plays. Themelis's early poetry revealed a complexity of 
metaphysical thought and had for themes loneliness, the search for self-knowledge and 
integrity, the invocation of a lost innocence and paradise, a lost "face," and an inquiry into the 
meaning of death. What is impressive about this mature poetry is the distillation of his 
thought in statements of simplicity with few of the decorative aids of metaphor or trope, 
relying for poetic worth solely on the strength and clarity of his perceptions. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιώργος Θέμελης γεννήθηκε το 1900 στη Σάμο. Πήρε πτυχίο Λογοτεχίας από το 
Πανεπιστήμιο Θεσσαλονίκης το 1925 και δίδαξε ελληνική Φιλολογία και Λογοτεχνία σε 
διάφορα σχολεία. Πέρα από την ποίηση έκανε μεταφράσεις σε πολλά αρχαία έργα. Τα πρώτα 
δείγματα της ποίησης του αποκαλύπτουν ένα συνοθύλλευμα μεταφυσικών σκέψεων και 
θεματολογία τη μοναξιά, την αναζήτηση της αυτογνωσίας και της ακεραιότητας, την 
επίκληση μιας χαμένης αθωότητας και ενός χαμένου παραδείσου και μια αναζήτηση για το 
νόημα του θανάτου. Το εντυπωσιακό στην πιο ώριμη φάση της ποίησής του, είναι η 
απόσταξη της σκέψης του σε απλές προτάσεις με ορισμένα διακοσμητικά στοιχεία 
μεταφοράς, βασίζοντας την αξία της ποίησής του μόνο στη δύναμη και τη διαύγεια των 
αντιλήψεων του.  

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    178                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Desolation 

(1953) 

 

Ερημιά 

(1953) 
 

Outside of us things die. No matter where you walk at night 
you hear Something like a whisper coming out 

Of streets you have never walked on Of houses you have 
never visited Of windows you have never opened 

Of rivers over which you have never stooped to drink 
Of ships on which you have never sailed. Outside of us die 

trees we have never known. The wind passes through 
vanished forests, Animals die from anonymity and birds 

from silence. Bodies die slowly, slowly, by being 
abandoned, Together with our old clothes laid away in 

coffers. Hands we have never touched die out of loneliness. 
Dreams we have never seen, from lack of light. 

Outside of us begins death's desolation. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar  

 
Έξω από μας πεθαίνουν τα πράγματα Απ' όπου 

περάσεις νύχτα, ακούς σαν ένα ψίθυρο Να βγαίνει από 
τους δρόμους πού δεν πάτησες, Από τα σπίτια πού 
δεν επισκέφθηκες, Απ' τα παράθυρα πού δεν άνοιξες, 
Απ ' τα ποτάμια πού δεν έσκυψες να πιεις νερό, Από 

τα πλοία πού δεν ταξίδεψες. 
Έξω από μας πεθαίνουν τα δέντρα πού δε γνωρίσαμε. 
Ό άνεμος περνά από δάση αφανισμένα. Πεθαίνουν 
τα ζώα από ανωνυμία και τα πουλιά από σιωπή. Τα 
σώματα πεθαίνουν σιγά-σιγά από εγκατάλειψη Μαζί 

με τα παλιά μας φορέματα μες στα σεντούκια. 
Πεθαίνουν τα χέρια, πού δεν αγγίσαμε, από μοναξιά. 
Τα όνειρα, πού δεν είδαμε, από στέρηση φωτός. Έξω 
από μας αρχίζει ή ερημία του θανάτου. Το μίσος 

όμως έβγαλε και κείνο τη φωνή του; 
«Ψαρού, τ' αγκίστρι, π' αφίσες, άλλου να ρίξης άμε». 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    179                            

 

  

[Index] 

Kavadhias Nikos (1910 - 1975) 
 

 
 

Nikos Kavvadias was born in 1910 in a small town in Manchuria near Harbin, by 
Greek parents from Cefallonia. When he was very young, his family returned to Greece. 
He wrote his first poems as a pupil at the elementary school. In 1929, he started working as a 
clerk in a shipping office and a few months later he went on board a freighter as a sailor. Over 
the next few years he continued to travel on the freighters, returning home wretched and 
penniless, only to take off again shortly after. At World War II started, he became a soldier 
and fought in Albania, and, throughout the German Occupation he lived in Athens, landed. 
He embarked again in 1944 and travelled continuously, as a wireless operator, all over the 
world, until November 1974 -- three months before the fatal stroke he suffered on February 
10,1975. 
”Vardia”, his only novel, was published for the first time in 1954. His collection of poems 
“Marabou” was published in 1933, “Pousi” in 1947, and “Traverso” in 1975. His short stories 
“Li” and “Of the War/On my Horse” were published in 1987. "Li" was produced as a film in 
1995 with the title "Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea". 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

Ο Νίκος Καββαδίας γεννήθηκε το 1910 σε μιά μικρή πόλη της Μαντζουρίας κοντά 
στο Χαρμπίν, από γονείς Ελληνες (Κεφαλλονίτες). Οταν ήταν πολύ μικρός, η οικογένεια 
γύρισε στην Ελλάδα. Μαθητής του Δημοτικού, έγραψε τα πρώτα του ποιήματα. Το 1929, 
πήγε υπάλληλος σε ναυτικό γραφείο και λίγους μήνες αργότερα μπαρκάρησε ναύτης σε 
φορτηγό. Για μερικά χρόνια, συνέχισε να φεύγει με τα φορτηγά, να γυρίζει πίσω 
ταλαιπωρημένος και αδέκαρος, για να ξαναφύγει σε λίγο. Στον Β' Παγκόσμιο  Πόλεμο, πήγε 
στρατιώτης στην Αλβανία κι έμεινε ξέμπαρκος στην Αθήνα, τα χρόνια της Γερμανικής 
Κατοχής. Ξαναμπαρκάρησε το 1944 και ταξίδεψε αδιάκοπα, ως ασυρματιστής, σε όλο τον 
κόσμο, ως τον Νοέμβρη του 1974 -- τρείς μήνες πριν απ' το εγκεφαλικό επεισόδιο, στις 10 
του Φλεβάρη, 1975. 

Η “Βάρδια”, το μοναδικό του μυθιστόρημα, κυκλοφόρησε για πρώτη φορά το 1954. Η 
ποιητική συλλογή “Μαραμπού” κυκλοφόρησε το 1933, το “Πούσι” το 1947, και το “ 
Τραβέρσο ” το 1975. Τα μικρά πεζά “Λι”, και “Του πολέμου/Στο άλογό μου” κυκλοφόρησαν 
το 1987. Το "Λι" γυρίστηκε σε κινηματογραφική ταινία το 1995 με τίτλο "Between the Devil 
and the Deep Blue Sea".  

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    180                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Marabou 

(1933) 

 

Μαραμπού 

(1933) 
 

Sailors I have bunked with say of me 
that I'm a thick-skinned roughneck, and depraved. 

that I despise all women treacherously, 
that never once have I shacked up with them. 

They even say I take hashish, cocaine. 
that some vile, loathsome passion grips my soul, 

that my whole body is deeply stigmatized 
with lewd tattoos, disgusting and perverse, 

They also speak of still more dreadful crimes 
that are crude myths and fabricated lies; 

but that which cost me my deepest lethal wound 
not one man knows: I've told no living soul! 
For when at twilight tropic nights have fallen 
and flocks of marabou fly toward the West, 
something persistent goads me to write down 
what has become my endless, secret wound. 

1 was midshipman once on postal ships 
that sailed the Egyptian line to southern France, 

and knew her then a pure white Alpine flower 
until close filial ties bound us together. 
The aristocratic, frail and melancholy 
child of a rich Egyptian who had killed 

himself, she sailed her sorrow to far lands, 
hoping to drown her deep grief somewhere there. She 

almost always read Bashkirtsev's Journal 
and madly adored the Saint of Avila. 

she'd often read to me French mournful verses 
and gaze for hours on the sea's expanse. 

And I, who'd only known the flesh of whores 
and had a spineless and sea-battered soul, 

found by her side my long-lost childhood joys 
and listened as to a sibyl, ecstatically. 

 

Λένε για μένα οι ναυτικοί πού έζήσαμε μαζί 
πώς είμαι κακοτράχαλο τομάρι διεστραμμένο, 
πώς τις γυναίκες μ' ένα τρόπον ύπουλο μισώ 

κι ότι μ' αυτές να κοιμηθώ ποτέ μου δεν πηγαίνω. 
Ακόμα, λένε πώς τραβώ χασίσι και κοκό, 

πώς κάποιο πάθος με κρατεί φριχτό και σιχαμένο, 
κι ολόκληρο έχω το κορμί με ζωγραφιές αισχρές, 

σιχαμερά παράξενες, βαθιά στιγματισμένο. 
Ακόμα, λένε πράματα φριχτά πάρα πολύ, 

πού είν' όμως ψέματα χοντρά και κατασκευασμένα, 
κι αυτό πού έστοίχισε σε με πληγές θανατερές 
κανείς δεν το  'μαθέ, γιατί δεν το 'πα σε κανένα. 
Μ' απόψε, τώρα πού έπεσεν ή τροπική βραδιά, 

και φεύγουν προς τα δυτικά των Μαραμπού τα σμήνη 
κάτι με σπρώχνει επίμονα, να γράψω στο χαρτί, εκείνο, 
πού παντοτινή κρυφή πληγή μου εγίνη. Ήμουνα τότε 

δόκιμος σ' ένα λαμπρό ποστάλ 
και ταξιδεύαμε Αίγυπτο γραμμή Νότιο Γαλλία. 
Τότε τη γνώρισα —σαν άνθος έμοιαζε αλπικό— 

και μια στενή μας έδεσεν αδελφική φιλία. 
Αριστοκρατική, λεπτή και μελαγχολική, 

κόρη ενός πλούσιου Αιγύπτιου οπού 'χε αυτοκτονήσει, 
ταξίδευε τη λύπη της σε χώρες μακρινές, μήπως εκεί 
γινότανε να τηνε λησμονήσει. Πάντα σχεδόν της 

Μπασκιρτσέφ κρατούσε το Ζουρνάλ,και την Αγία της  
Άβιλας παράφορα αγαπούσε, συχνά στίχους απάγγελνε 
θλιμμένους γαλλικούς,κι ώρες πολλές προς τη γαλάζιαν 
έκταση εκοιτούσε. Κι εγώ, πού μόνον εταίρων εγνώριζα 

κορμιά, κι είχα μιάν άβουλη ψυχή δαρμένη άπ' τα 
πελάη, μπροστά της εξανάβρισκα την παιδική χαρά 

και, σαν προφήτη, εκστατικός την άκουα να μιλάει. Ένα 
μικρό της πέρασα σταυρόν άπ' το λαιμό κι εκείνη ένα 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    181                            

 

  

Around her throat I hung a small gold cross 
and she in turn gave me a handsome wallet; 
on earth there was no sadder man than I 
that day we reached her port of debarkation. 

Sailing the freighters, I called constantly 
to mind my patroness, my guardian angel, 
until her photograph by the prow became 

a green oasis in the desert's heart. 
I think that I should stop my story here, 

for my hand trembles, the torrid wind inflames me. 
Here gorgeous riverine tropic flowers stink, 

a stupid marabou shrills in the distance. 
But I'll write on , . . One night in a strange port 

I soon got drunk on whiskey, gin, and beer, 
until toward midnight, staggering heavily, 

I took the road toward houses lewd and lost. 
There where coarse women lure their sailor friends, 
some whore in laughter suddenly snatched my hat 

(an old French habit of street prostitutes) 
and I tagged after, almost against my will. 

Her room was small and filthy, like all the rest, 
plaster hung down in shreds along the walls, 
and she but human rags with a hoarse voice, 

yet with strange, brooding, demon-driven eyes. She dowsed 
the lights, and we flopped down together, 

My fingers could quite clearly count her bones. 
She stank of absinthe. I woke, as the poets say, 
"as soon as dawn had strewn her rose-red petals." 

When in the pallid morning light I saw 
her plain, she seemed so sad and cursed a creature 

that with an awe most odd, as though with fear, 
I hurriedly took my wallet out to pay her. 

Twelve sad French francs... But she screamed frantically 
and stared with frightened eyes once on my purse, once on 

my face, with horror. Then I, too, froze, for round her 
throat I saw a small gold cross. 

I rushed out like a madman, without my hat, 
like one insane who lolls and staggers on, 

μου χάρισε μεγάλο πορτοφόλι 
κι ήμουν ο πιο δυστυχισμένος άνθρωπος της γης, 
όταν έφθάσαμε σ' αυτήν πού θα 'φεύγε, την πόλη. 
Την έσκεφτόμουνα πολλές φορές στα φορτηγά, 
ως ένα παραστάτη μου κι άγγελο φύλακα μου, 
και μια φωτογραφία της στην πλώρη ήταν για με 
όαση, πού ένας συναντά μες στην καρδιά της 
Νομίζω πώς θέ να 'πρεπε να σταματήσω εδώ 

Τρέμει το χέρι μου, ό θερμός αγέρας με φλογίζει. 
Κάτι άνθη εξαίσια τροπικά του πόταμου βρωμοΰν, 
κι ένα βλακώδες Μαραμπού παράμερα γρυλίζει. 
Θα προχωρήσω!. .. Μια βραδιά σε πόρτο ξενικό 
είχα μεθύσει τρομερά με ουίσκυ, τζιν και μπύρα, 
και κατά τα μεσάνυχτα, τρικλίζοντας βαριά, 

το δρόμο προς τα βρωμερά, χαμένα σπίτια επήρα. 
Αισχρές γυναίκες τράβαγαν εκεί τους ναυτικούς, 
κάποια μ' άρπαξ' απότομα, γελώντας, το καπέλο 

(παλιά συνήθεια γαλλική του δρόμου των πόρνων) 
κι εγώ την ακολούθησα σχεδόν χωρίς να θέλω. 
Μια κάμαρα στενή, μικρή, σαν όλες βρωμερή, 

οι ασβέστες απ' τους τοίχους της επέφτανε κομμάτια, πι 
αύτη ράκος ανθρώπινο πού εμίλαγε βραχνά, με 

σκοτεινά, παράξενα, δαιμονισμένα μάτια. Της είπα κι 
έσβησε το φως.. Επέσαμε μαζί. 

Τα δάχτυλα μου καθαρά μέτρααν τα κόκαλα της. 
Βρωμούσε αψέντι. Εξύπνησα, ως λένε οι ποιητές, 
« μόλις εσκόρπιζεν ή αυγή τα ροδοπέταλά της ». 
Όταν την είδα και στο φως τ' αχνό το πρωινό, 
μου φάνηκε λυπητερή, μα κολασμένη τόσο, 
πού μ' ένα δέος αλλόκοτο, σα να 'χα φοβηθεί, 

το πορτοφόλι μ,ου έβγαλα γοργά να την πληρώσω. 
Δώδεκα φράγκα γαλλικά . . . Μα έβγαλε μια φωνή, 

κι είδα μια έμενα να κοιτά με μάτι αγριεμένο, 
και μια το πορτοφόλι μου . . . Μ' απόμεινα κι εγώ 
ένα σταυρόν απάνω της σαν είδα κρεμασμένο. 
Ξεχνώντας το καπέλο μου βγήκα σαν τον τρελό, 
σαν τον τρελό πού αδιάκοπα τρικλίζει και χαζεύει, 

φέρνοντας μέσα στο αίμα μου μια αρρώστια τρομερή, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    182                            

 

  

but bearing in my blood a dread disease 
that in great torment racks rny body still. 
All sailors I have bunked with say of me 

that it's been years since I've shacked up with girls, 
that I'm a roughneck, that I take cocaine. 

If the poor wretches only knew, they'd all forgive me . . .  
My hand shakes... fever... I've lost count and stare 

at a still marabou by the riverbank 
that stubbornly stares at me. We're both alike, 

I think, in loneliness and stupidity. 
 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

πού ακόμα βασανιστικά το σώμα μου παιδεύει. Λένε 
για μένα οι ναυτικοί πού εκάμαμε μαζί πώς χρόνια τώρα 
με γυναίκα εγώ δεν έχω πέσει, πώς είμαι παλιοτόμαρο 
καί πώς τραβάω κοκό. Μ' αν ήξεραν οι δύστυχοι, θα μ' 

είχαν συχωρέσει... 
Το χέρι τρέμει . . . Ο πυρετός  . . .  Ξεχάστηκα πολύ, 

ασάλευτο ένα Μαραμπού στην όχθη να κοιτάζω, Κι έτσι 
καθώς επίμονα κι εκείνο με κοιτά, 

νομίζω πώς στή μοναξιά και στη βλακεία του μοιάζω. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    183                            

 

  

[Index] 

Kavafis Konstandinos (1863 - 1933) 
 

 
 

 

Cavafis Konstandinos was born on 1863 in Alexandria, Egypt, and died in Athens on 
1933. On his father's death the family emigrated to Liverpool and London but returned to 
Alexandria where he remained for the rest of his life working in the Department of Irrigation 
of the ministry of Public Works, reaching the rank of assistant to the Bureau Chief. His 
poems, written on a demotic base, but with a mixture strangely his own from Ancient 
Byzantine, and Medieval Greek are brief, neither  motional nor lyrical, but dramatic, 
narrative, objective, realistic, a recounting of facts and episodes in a tone of voice which is 
dry, precise deliberately prosaic and, above all, ironic. His is the undisputed founder of 
modem Greek poetry. 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Κωνσταντίνος Καβάφης γεννήθηκε το 1863 στην Αλεξάνδρεια της Αιγύπτου και 
πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1933. Μετά το θάνατο του πατέρα του η οικογένεια μετανάστευσε στο 
Λίβερπουλ και στο Λονδίνο αλλά επέστρεψε στην Αλεξάνδρεια όπου παρέμειναν για το 
υπόλοιπο της ζωής τους. Εργάστηκε στο τμήμα άρδευσης του Υπουργείου Δημόσιων Έργων, 
κατακτώντας το βαθμό του βοηθού Διευθυντή. Τα ποιήματά του γράφτηκαν με βάση τη 
δημοτική αλλά με ένα προσωπικό μίγμα από αρχαίο-Βυζαντινά και μεσαιωνικά ελληνικά 
χωρίς να είναι λυρικός αλλά δραματικός, αφηγηματικός, αντικειμενικός, ρεαλιστικός, μια 
εξιστόρηση των γεγονότων και των επεισοδίων με έναν ξερό τόνο φωνής, πεζογραφικό και, 
προ πάντων ειρωνικό. Είναι αδιαφιλονίκητα ο ιδρυτής της ελληνικής μοντέρνας ποίησης. 

 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    184                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The city 

(1894) 

 

Η πόλις 

(1894) 
 

You said, "I will go to another land. I will go to another sea. 
Another city shall he found better than this. Each one 
of my endeavors is condemned by fate: my heart lies 

buried like a corpse. How long in this disintegration can the 
mind remain. Wherever I turn my eyes, wherever I gaze,  

see here only the black ruins of my life where 1 have 
spent so many years, and ruined and wrecked myself." New 
places you shall never find, you'll not find other seas. The 
city still shall follow you. You'll wander still in the same 
streets, you'll roam in the same neighborhoods, in 
these same houses you'll turn gray. You'll always arrive 
at this same city. Don't hope for somewhere else; no ship 
for you exists, no road exists. Just as you've ruined your 

life here, in this  small corner of earth, you've wrecked it now 
the whole world through. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Είπες: «Θα πάγω σ' άλλη γη, θα πάγω σ' άλλη 
θάλασσα. Μια πόλις άλλη θα βρεθεί καλύτερη από 
αυτή. Κάθε προσπάθεια μου μια καταδίκη είναι 

γραφτή κι είν ' ή καρδιά μου - σαν νεκρός - θαμμένη. 
Ό νους μου ως πότε μες στον μαρασμόν αυτόν θα μένει; 
Όπου το μάτι μου γυρίσω, όπου κι αν δω ερείπια 

μαύρα της ζωής μου βλέπω) εδώ, 
πού τόσα χρόνια πέρασα καί ρήμαξα και χάλασα.» 

Καινούργιους τόπους δεν θα βρεις, δεν θα 'βρεις άλλες 
θάλασσες. Η πόλις θα σε ακολουθεί. Στούς δρόμους 
θα γυρνάς τους ίδιους. Και στές γειτονιές τές ίδιες θα 

γερνάς και μες στα ίδια σπίτια αυτά θ' ασπρίζεις. Πάντα 
στην πόλη αυτή θα φθάνεις. Για τα αλλού - μη ελπίζεις 
δεν έχει πλοίο για σε, δεν έχει οδό. Έτσι πού τη ζωή 
σου ρήμαξες εδώ στην κόχη τούτη την μικρή, σ ' 

όλην την γη την χάλασες. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    185                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Thermopylae 

(1901) 

 

Θερμοπύλες 

(1901) 
 

All honor to those who in their lives 
have set themselves to guard Thermopylae. 

Not swerving from their line of duty, 
upright and just in all their actions, 
yet filled with pity and compassion; 
generous when they're rich, and when 
they're poor, generous in little things; 

still helping others all they can; 
telling the truth always, and yet 
holding no hatred against liars. 

And greater honor still is due them 
when they foresee (and many do foresee) 

that Ephialtes finally will appear, 
and that the Medes, at last, will get through. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Τιμή σ' εκείνους όπου στην ζωή των 
όρισαν και φυλάγουν Θερμοπύλες. 
Ποτέ από το χρέος μη κινοΰντες 

δίκαιοι κι ίσιοι σ' όλες των τές πράξεις, 
αλλά με λύπη κιόλας κι ευσπλαχνία· 
γενναίοι οσάκις είναι πλούσιοι, κι όταν 
είναι πτωχοί, πάλ' εις μικρόν γενναίοι, 
πάλι συντρέχοντες όσο μπορούνε· 
πάντοτε την αλήθεια ομιλούντες, 

πλην χωρίς μίσος για τους ψευδόμενους. 
Καί περισσότερη τιμή τους πρέπει 

όταν προβλέπουν (και πολλοί προβλέπουν) 
πώς ο Εφιάλτης θα φανεί στο τέλος, 
κι οι Μήδοι επιτέλους θα διαβούνε. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    186                            

 

  

[Index] 

Kazantzakis Nikos (1883 - 1957) 
 

 
 

 

Kazantzakis Nikos was born on 1883 in Iraklion, Crete, and died on 1957 in a hospital 
clinic in Freiburg, Germany. He took his degree in law at the University of Athens in 1906, 
continued his studies at the Sorbonne where he also attended lectures by Henri Bergson, and 
began his many peregrinations writing travel books on England, Spain, Japan. He translated 
into modern Greek about fifty books. Wrote his own epic poem, The Odyssey; a book of 
poems about the men and women who influenced him most in life, about 12 novels, 22 plays, 
9 films scenarios, anautobiography, a history of Russian literature, many books for grade 
school use, three philosophical studies, and hundreds of articles for newspapers, periodicals, 
and encyclopedias. For brief periods he served as General Director of the Ministry of Public 
Welfare, 1919; as minister without portfolio, 1945; and as Advisor  for Literature for 
UNESCO, 1947. For 1956 he was given the State Prize for Drama, in 1957 the International 
Peace Prize, and was several times nominated for the Nobel Prize. His novel Zorba the Greek 
was made into an American film and Broadway musical; his novel The Greek Passion into a 
French Film and into an opera by the Czech composer Ohyslav Martinu; and his play The 
Master Craftsman into a Greek opera by Manolis Kalomiris.  

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο  Νίκος Καζαντακης γεννήθηκε το 1883 στο Ηράκλειο της Κρήτης και πέθανε το 
1957 σε μια νοσοκομειακή κλινική στο Freiburg της Γερμανίας. Αποφοίτησε από τη νομική 
του Πανεπιστημίου Αθηνών το 1906 και συνέχισε τις σπουδές του στη Sorbonne όπου 
παρακολούθησε τις διαλέξεις του Henri Bergson και άρχισε τις περιπλανήσεις του γράφοντας 
τα ταξιδιωτικά βιβλία για την Αγγλία, Ισπανία και Ιαπωνία. Μετέφρασε στα νέα ελληνικά 
περίπου πενήντα βιβλία. Έγραψε το επικό ποίημά του, την Οδύσσεια, ένα βιβλίο ποιημάτων 
για τους άνδρες και τις γυναίκες που τον επηρέασαν πιό πολύ στη ζωή του, περίπου 12 
μυθιστορήματα, 22 θεατρικά έργα, 9 σενάρια ταινιών, την αθτοβιογραφία του, την ιστορία 
της ρωσικής λογοτεχνίας, πολλά σχολικά βιβλία, τρεις φιλοσοφικές μελέτες, και εκατοντάδες 
άρθρα για εφημερίδες, περιοδικά και εγκυκλοπαίδειες. Υπηρέτησε το 1919 ως γενικός 
γραμματέας του Υπουργείου Δημόσιας Ευημερίας, ως Υπουργός ανευ χαρτοφυλακίου το 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    187                            

 

  

1945 και ως σύμβουλος λογοτεχνίας για την ΟΥΝΕΣΚΟ το 1947. Το 1956 του απονεμήθηκε 
το κρατικό βραβείο θεάτρου, το 1957 το διεθνές βραβείο ειρήνης, και αρκετές φορές 
προτάθηκε για το βραβείο Νόμπελ. Το έργο του Ζορμπάς έγινε αμερικάνικη ταινία και 
μιουσικαλ στο Broadway, το μυθιστόρημά του Το Ελληνικό Πάθος γυρίστηκε γαλλική ταινία 
και όπερα από τον τσέχο συνθέτη  Οhyslav Martinu και το θεατρικό του έργο Ο 
Πρωτομάστορας σε ελληνική όπερα από τον Μανώλη καλομοίρη. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    188                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Hymn from verse drama Christ 

(1928) 

 

Από το δράμα Χριστός 

(1928) 
 

Virgin Mother, on whose untouched body the seed has 
fallen 

like spirit and the Logos has become flesh feeding 
on your ever virginal womb, like an infant! 

My Lady Submission, you too accept the pain, 
like the Cross, and bow your head 

with patience, toward the earth, smiling, 
my Lady, so that the world won't drown in your tears! 

You are the Ark that shines on the abyss 
like an egg and sails on God's dark seas, 

guarding inside you the seeds of all! 
You tread on the green crescent and, 
holding all our hopes in your hands, 

ascend to the untamed sky loaded and 
faintly smiling, stand by your son. 

You are the blooming branch on the abyss 
of its strength; you are the meek thought 

in the flaming furnace of its wrath. 
You have planted the soft, tender tree of Goodness 
in between the tree of Life and that of Knowledge 

in God's garden. And it grows tall, watered by your tears, 
sprouts branches, surpasses the other trees, blooms, bears 

fruit like the good olive tree and shines. 
And the Omnipotent rests in its shade. 

And when the Second, the horrible, Coming arrives, 
and the Archangels will ruthlessly separate 

the goats from the sheep, you will stoop 
to your son imploringly to intercede, Merciful Lady! 

And at once his untamed mind will soften 
and the columns will disperse, and the righteous 

will embrace the sinners and be embraced, and pure virgins 
will do so with women who had loved much on earth. 

 

Παρθένα Μάνα, , που σαν πνέμα επιάστη ο σπόρος 
στο αφίλητο κορμί, κι ο Λόγος εσαρκώθη 

το αμόλευτο τρυγώντας σπλάχνο σου σα βρέφος! 
"Ω Δέσποινα μου Υποταγή, τον πόνο δέξου τον 
και συ, σαν το σταυρό, και γείρε το κεφάλι 
με υπομονή, κατά τη γης χαμογελώντας— 

να μην πνίγει, Κυρά, στα κλάματα σου ο κόσμος! 
Εσύ 'σαι ή κιβωτός, πού σαν αυγό στην άβυσσο 
λάμπεις και στου Θεού τη σκοτεινιά αρμενίζεις, 
βαθιά τα σπέρματα όλα μέσα σου φρουρώντας. 

Το πράσινο δρεπανωτό πατάς φεγγάρι, 
κι όλες στα χέρια σου κρατώντας τις ελπίδες μας 

στον άγριον ουρανό κατάφορτη ανεβαίνεις* 
κι αχνογελώντας στέκεσαι δεξιά στο γιο σου. 
Εσύ 'σαι το ανθισμένο το κλαρί στην άβυσσο 
της δύναμης του εσύ 'σαι ο στοχασμός ο πράος 

μες στο φλεγόμενο καμίνι της οργής του. 
Αναμεσός στης Ζωής το δένδρο και της Γνώσης, 
στον κήπο του Θεού συ φύτεψες, Κυρά μου, 
το αφράτο, τρυφερό της Καλοσύνης δένδρο· 
κι ως πότιζες το με το κλάμα, επήρε μπόι, 

πετάει κλαριά, σκεπάζει τ' άλλα δέντρα, ανθίζει, 
ρίχνει καρπό, σαν την καλήν ελιά, καί φέγγει 
κι ο Παντοδύναμος στον ίσκιο του αναπαύεται. 

Κι ή Δεύτερη φριχτή σαν έρθει Παρουσία 
κι οι αρχάγγελοι άσπλαχνα τα ρίφια θα χωρίζουν 
από τ' αρνιά, θα σκύψεις τότε εσύ στο γιο σου, 

παρακλητά, να μεσιτέψεις, Ελεούσα! 
Τ' αδάμαστα μεμιάς θα του μερώσουν φρένα 
κι οι τάξες θα χαλάσουν οι διπλές, καί δίκαιοι 

θ' αγκαλιαστούν με αμαρτωλούς, κι αγνές παρθένες με 
τις γυναίκες πού πολύ στη γης αγάπησαν. Νικάς τη 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    189                            

 

  

You defeat justice, You, with love! 
And all of us together will start to dance, and you Lady will 
stand at the end of the line dancing in the unsetting sun of 

God joyful and very humble, like the heart of man. 

 
Translated by:  M. Bayron Raizis   

Δικαιοσύνη Εσύ με την αγάπη 
κι όλοι μαζί θα σύρουμε χορό, και θα 'σαι στον κάβο 

του χορού, Κυρά και θα χορεύεις 
στον αβασίλευτο ήλιο του Θεού χαρούμενη 

και ταπεινή πολύ, σαν την καρδιά του ανθρώπου! 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    190                            

 

  

[Index] 

Karelli Zoe (1901 - 1998) 
 

 
 

 

Karelli Zoe was Born on 1901 in Thessaloniki and died there on 1998. She received 
the education of a girl of good family according to her class and period by being tutored in 
English, German, French and Italian. She shared the Second State Prize in Poetry in 1955, 
was awarded the Palmes Academique by France's Ministry of Education in 1959, won the 
First State Prize in Poetry in 1974 and the Ouranis Award by the Athens Academy in 1978. 
Karelli has been remarkably consistent in her existentialist attitude. Whatever, she has written 
has been a quest for a way out of man's modern impasse, for redemption from the feeling that 
the soul has been ravaged and devastated, that a promise for justice has been broken. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Η Ζωή Καρέλλη γεννήθηκε το 1901 στη Θεσσαλονίκη και πεθανε το 1998. Έλαβε την 
εκπαίδευση ενός κοριτσιού καλής οικογένειας σύμφωνα με την καταγωγή της και διδάχτηκε 
στα αγγλικά, γερμανικά, γαλλικά και ιταλικά. Μοιράστηκε το δεύτερο κρατικό βραβείο 
ποίησης το 1955, και της απονεμήθηκε το Palmes Academique από το Γαλλικό Υπουργείο  
Παιδείας το 1959, έλαβε επίσης το πρώτο κρατικό βραβείο ποίησης το 1974 και το βραβείο 
Ουράνη από την Ακαδημία Αθηνών το 1978. Η Καρέλλη ήταν συνεπής στην υπαρξιακή της 
συμπεριφορά. Οτιδήποτε έχει γράψει περιέχει την αναζήτηση διεξόδου από το αδιέξοδο του 
σύγχρονου ανθρώπου, την εξαγορά από το συναίσθημα ότι η ψυχή έχει ερημωθεί και έχει 
καταστραφεί και ότι η υπόσχεση για δικαιοσύνη έχει αθετηθεί.  

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    191                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Worker in the workshops of time 

(1948) 

 

Εργάτης στα εργαστήρια του 
χρόνου 

(1948) 
 

As he wrought the shape, a worker, a blower of glass,  
felt his love profoundly for the material  

into which he blew his breath. At times crystal or like pearl, 
mother-of-pearl, precious ivoryor opal with misty colors 

drifting toward azure. All these were materials that become 
shapes, erotic shapes for whatever exists within time. The 
shape, receptacle of time, enclosed it erotically, an offering 

to time, 
expectation and acceptance both, that form which is an 

embrace of time, the singular shape he wrought 
out of his own essence, his own imagination. 

But as his material hand caressed the final shape afterward, 
he understood the materiality of time as his own hand 

together with the shape and the precious, erotic material 
were transformed into the diaphanous meaning of time. All 

together, but particularly he. 

 
Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Καθώς εργαζόταν το σχήμα εργάτης σε υαλουργείο 
κατάλαβε πολύ καλά τον έρωτα για την ύλη, 

αφού φυσούσε την πνοή του. Κάποτε κρύσταλλο, 
κάποιο μαργαριτάρι, φίλντισι, πολύτιμο 

ελαφαντοκόκκαλο ή οπάλι με χρώματα ομίχλης προς το 
κυανό. Όλ' αυτά ύλη, που γινόταν σχήμα, σχήμα 

ερωτικό, για ό,τι υπάρχει μεσ' στο χρόνο. Το σχήμα, 
δοχείο του χρόνου,  

ερωτικό τον περιέβαλε, προσφορά στο χρόνο  
προσδοκία και δέξιμο μαζί αγκάλιασμα στου χρόνου τη 

μορφή, το σχήμα που σχημάτιζε ειδικό,  
δικής του σημασίας, δική του φαντασία. 

Όμως καθώς το σχήμα έψαυε τελειωμένο, ύστερα το 
υλικό του χέρι, κατάλαβε του χρόνου την υλικότητα  
καθώς το χέρι το δικό του και το σχήμα μαζί, και το 
πολύτιμο ερωτικό υλικό γινόταν διάφανη έννοια του 

χρόνου. Όλα μαζί Ιδίως ο εαυτός του. 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    192                            

 

  

[Index] 

Karyiotakis Kostas (1896 - 1928) 
 

 
 

 

Kariotakis Kostas was born on 1896 in Tripolis, the Peloponnesos, and committed 
suicide by shooting himself on 1928 in Preveza, Epiros. He received his degree in law from 
the University of Athens in 1919 and became a government clerk in the ministry of the 
Interior, sent unwillingly to posts in various parts of Greece. In 1928 was sent to Preveza. He 
is the best representative of the generation of the twenties, of the Damned who wrote of an 
unbearable ennui of suffocation, of futility, exhausted in emotion and language both. Better 
than all the others, he best expressed the anguish of the poets between two world wars, and 
kept an even balance between sarcastic lamentation and mournful satire. He committed 
suicide not so much in protest against the tragedy of life as against its insignificance, its farce, 
its musical-comedy strut.  

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Κώστας Καρυωτάκης γεννήθηκε το 1896 στην Τρίπολη της Πελλοπονήσου και  
αυτοπυροβολίθηκε το 1928 στην Πρέβεζα. Αποφοίτησε από τη νομική Αθηνών το 1919 και 
έγινε δημόσιος υπάλληλος στο Υπουργείο Εσωτερικών και μετατέθηκε σε διάφορα μέρη της 
Ελλάδας. Το 1928 μετατέθηκε στην Πρέβεζα. Είναι ο καλύτερος εκφραστής της γεννιάς του 
'20. Εξέφρασε καλύτερα από όλους το άγχος των ποιητών που βρέθηκαν μεταξύ δύο 
παγκόσμιων πολέμων και κράτησε μια ισορροπία μεταξύ του σαρκαστικού θρήνου και της 
λυπημένης σάτυρας. Αυτοκτόνησε όχι τόσο για να διαμαρτυρηθεί ενάντια στην τραγωδία της 
ζωής αλλά ενάντια στην ασημαντότητά της, τη φάρσα της, στην κορδωμένη μουσικο-
κωμωδία της. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    193                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Byron 

(1927) 

 

Μπάυρον 

(1927) 
 

He became aware That verse was to him 
Sad fate's whim And vanity's fair. 

Splendour so great Up the city's walls 
And brave youth falls By lagoon and gate! 

Old age grows Bold; valiant men 
Will storm out strong. And Byron knows 

To live and pen The divine song. 

Translated by:  M. Byron Raizis   

 

Ένοιωσεν ότι του ήσαν οι στίχοι 
άχαρη τύχη και ματαιότη. 

Μα ποια λαμπρότη εκεί στα τείχη 
και ποια στα ρήχη ένδοξη νιότη! 
Γίνονται οι γέροι γαύροι θα ορμήσει 
ανδρών λουλούδι, κι ο Μπάϋρον ξέρει 
πώς να το ζήσει το θειο τραγούδι. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    194                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Preveza 

(1928) 

 

Πρέβεζα 

(1928) 
 

Death is the buzzards that bicker and squawk 
against black walls, on red roof tiles, 
death is the women who make love 

as easily as they peel onions. 
Death is the filthy, commonplace streets 
with all their great, splendiferous names, 
the olive groves, the surrounding sea, 

even the sun, death within deaths. 
Death is the inspector who wraps up 
a morsel to see if it's short-weighed, 

death is the hyacinths placed on the porch, 
the school teacher reading the day's news. 
Army Base, Garrison, Troops at Preveza. 
On Sundays we'll flock to hear the band. 

I've opened now a bank account, 
my first deposit: just one dollar. 

As you stroll on the pier slowly, you say: 
"Do I exist?" Then: "You don't exist!" 

The steamship docks. Its flag hoisted high. 
Perhaps the Prefect has just arrived. 

If only among these men, at least 
one, only one, but died of disgust, 

with decorous manner, silent and sad, 
we'd have high fun at his funeral 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Θάνατος είναι κάργιες πού χτυπιούνται 
στους μαύρους τοίχους και στα κεραμίδια, 
θάνατος οι γυναίκες πού αγαπιούνται 
καθώς να καθαρίζουνε κρεμμύδια. 

Θάνατος οι λεροί, ασήμαντοι δρόμοι 
με τα λαμπρά, μεγάλα ονόματα τους, 

ό ελαιώνας, γύρω ή θάλασσα, κι ακόμη 
ο ήλιος, θάνατος μέσα στους θανάτους. 
Θάνατος ό αστυνόμος πού διπλώνει, 
για να ζυγίσει, μια «ελλιπή» μερίδα, 
θάνατος τα ζουμπούλια στο μπαλκόνι 
κι ό δάσκαλος με την εφημερίδα. 

Βάσις, Φρουρά, Έξηκονταρχία Πρεβέζης. 
Την Κυριακή θ' ακούσουμε τη μπάντα. 

Επήρα ένα βιβλιάριο Τραπέζης, 
πρώτη κατάθεσις δραχμαΐ τριάντα. 
Περπατώντας αργά στην προκυμαία, 

«υπάρχω;» λες, κι υστέρα: «δεν υπάρχεις!» 
Φτάνει το πλοίο. Υψωμένη σημαία. 
Ίσως έρχεται ό κύριος Νομάρχης. 

"Αν τουλάχιστον, μέσα στους, ανθρώπους 
αυτούς, ένας επέθαινε από αηδία... 

Σιωπηλοί, θλιμμένοι, με σεμνούς τρόπους, 
θα διασκεδάζαμε όλοι στην κηδεία. 

 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    195                            

 

  

[Index] 

Katsaros Mihales (1919 - 1998) 
 

 
 

 

He was born in Kiparissia in 1919 but lived in Athens where he died on 1998. He 
chanced many jobs. He worked as a journalist, as a cashier e.c.t. He appeared in Greek 
literature in 1946 with a traditional poem but after a few time   his poetry became more 
modern ,more caustic and more revolutionary. Some of his poems have been set to music. 
 

 [Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Γεννήθηκε στην Κυπαρισία το 1919 αλλά έζησε στην Αθήνα όπου και πέθανε το 
1998. Δούλεψε σε πολλές εργασίες όπως δημοσιογράφος, ταμίας κα. Εμφανίστηκε στην 
ελληνική λογοτεχνία το 1946 με ένα παραδοσιακό ποίημα αλλά μετά από λίγο καιρό η 
ποίησή του έγινε πιό σύγχρονη, καυστικότερη και πιό επαναστατική. Μερικά από τα 
ποιήματά του έχουν μελοποιηθεί. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    196                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

My last wiil and testament 

(1950-53) 

 

Η διαθήκη μου 

(1950-53) 
 

Resist him who builds a humble hut and says: Ι'm well off 
here. Resist him who returns to his home again and says: 
Glory be to God. Resist the Persian tapestry of apartment 

buildings stout office clerks export-import firms public 
education taxes and even me who is telling you this. Resist 

him 
who for endless hours from the grandstand salutes the 

passing parade the president of the Court of Appeals-resist 
him music drums fanfares all higher assemblies that twitter 
and twattle counsellors and conferees sipping their coffee 
this sterile woman who hands out leaflets on the lives of 

saints, myrrh and frankincenseand even me who is telling 
you this. Resist once more all those who are called great all 

who write of our times huddling by winter stoves the 
flatteries the good wishes the bowing and scraping of 

penpushers and cowards to their sagacious administrators. 
Resist the alien and passport bureaus the dreadful flags of 

nations and diplomacies 
the munitions factories those who say that beautiful words 

are "lyrical" patriotic songs saccharine songs with their 
weeping and wailing spectators the wind all the indifferent 

and the wise 
the others who pretend to be your friends and me, even me 
who is telling you this-resist me. We may then surely cross 

over into Freedom. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Αντισταθείτε σ' αυτόν πού χτίζει ένα μικρό σπιτάκι και 
λέει: «καλά είμαι εδώ». Αντισταθείτε σ' αυτόν πού 
γύρισε πάλι στο σπίτι και λέει: «Δόξα σοι ο Θεός», 

Αντισταθείτε στον περσικό τάπητα των πολυκατοικιών 
στον κοντό άνθρωπο του γραφείου στην εταιρεία 
«εισαγωγαί-έξαγωγαί» στην κρατική εκπαίδευση 

στο φόρο σε μένα ακόμα πού σας ιστορώ. 
Αντισταθείτε σ' αυτόν πού χαιρετάει άπ' την εξέδρα 
ώρες ατέλειωτες τις παρελάσεις στον πρόεδρο του 

Εφετείου αντισταθείτε στις μουσικές τα τούμπανα και 
τις παράτες σ' όλα τ' ανώτερα συνέδρια πού φλυαρούνε 
πίνουν καφέδες σύνεδροι συμβουλατόροι σ' αυτή την 
άγονη κυρία πού μοιράζει έντυπα άγιων λίβανον και 
σμύρναν σε μένα ακόμα πού σας ιστορώ. Αντισταθείτε 
πάλι σ' όλους αυτούς πού λέγονται μεγάλοι σ' όλους 

πού γράφουν λόγους για την εποχή δίπλα στη 
χειμωνιάτικη θερμάστρα στις κολακείες τις ευχές τις 
τόσες υποκλίσεις από γραφιάδες και δειλούς για το 
σοφό αρχηγό τους. Αντισταθείτε στις υπηρεσίες των 

αλλοδαπών και διαβατηρίων στις φοβερές σημαίες των 
κρατών και τη διπλωματία στα εργοστάσια πολεμικών 
υλών σ' αυτούς πού λένε λυρισμό τα ωραία λόγια στα 
θούρια στα γλυκερά τραγούδια με τους θρήνους στους 
θεατές στον άνεμο σ' όλους τους αδιάφορους και τους 
σοφούς στους άλλους πού κάνουνε το φίλο σας ως και 
σε μένα, σε μένα ακόμα πού σας ιστορώ αντισταθείτε.  

Τότε μπορεί βέβαιοι να περάσουμε προς την 
Ελευθερία. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    197                            

 

  

[Index] 

Kotsiras Yioryis (1921) 
 

 
 

 

Kotsiras Yioryis was born on 1921in Athens, took his degree in law and political 
science from the Univerity there, then studied literature and law at the Sorbonne for a year. 
He has traveled in many European countries, and has translated poems, plays and novels from 
French, Spanish and Italian, including Dante's Divine Comedy. Author of twelve books of, 
poetry, he was granted the Second State Prize for 1958, the National State Prize for 1975, and 
The Academy of Athens Award for 1978. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιώργης Κότσιρας γεννήθηκε το 1921 στην Αθήνα, αποφοίτησε από τη νομική και 
τις πολιτικές επιστήμες στην Αθήνα, κατόπιν σπόυδασε λογοτεχνία και νομικά στη Sorbonne 
για ένα έτος. Έχει ταξιδεψει σε πολλές ευρωπαϊκές χώρες, και έχει μεταφράσει ποιήματα, 
θεατρικά και μυθιστορήματα από τα γαλλικά, τα ισπανικά και τα ιταλικά, 
συμπεριλαμβανομένης της κωμωδίας του Dante. Έγραψε δώδεκα βιβλία ποίησης και του 
χορηγήθηκε το δεύτερο κρατικό βραβείο το 1958, το εθνικό κρατικό βραβείο το 1975, και το 
βραβείο της Ακαδημίας Αθηνών το 1978. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    198                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The Poet 

(1959) 

 

Ο Ποιητής 

(1959) 
 

I see the murder I visualize it Every moment  
I live my drama intensely throughout the ages I hear the 

footsteps that fall heavily like iron and close the  
door of my consciousness I am at once the murdered  

and the murdererBecause my blood will not sprout 
without blood Every moment I destroy and am  

destroyed I live with my pain, my joy and my sorrow 
 Ever so often  a drop of joy cuts off And slides away  

from the chasm  of my sorrow My loneliness is my  
death and my resurrection Every moment I am 

 resurrected and die again With this carnage which sought 
me and which I seek Crystalline splinters as in a  dream I 

seek my resurrection every moment. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Βλέπω το φόνο, τον οραματίζομαι 
Κάθε στιγμή ζω έντονα το δράμα μου στον αιώνα 

Ακούω τα βήματα πού έρχονται βαριά 
Σιδερένια και κλείνουν την πόρτα της συνείδησης μου. 

Είμαι ό σκοτωμένος μαζί κι ό φονιάς 
Γιατί δεν φυτρώνει δίχως το αίμα ή ζωή μου 

Κάθε στιγμή αφανίζομαι και αφανίζω 
Ζω με τον πόνο, τη χαρά και τη λύπη μου 

Κάθε τόσο μια στάλα χαράς φεύγει 
Γλιστράει από τη χαραμάδα της λύπης μου. 

Ή μοναξιά μου είναι ό θάνατος και ή ανάσταση μου 
Κάθε στιγμή ανασταίνομαι και πάλι πεθαίνω 

Με τούτο το φονικό πού με ζήτησε και το γυρεύω. 
Κρυστάλλινα θρύψαλα σαν σε όνειρο 

Κάθε στιγμή γυρεύω την ανάσταση μου. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    199                            

 

  

[Index] 

Nikolaedes Aristoteles (1922 - 1996) 
 

 
 

 

He was born in the Aegean island of Mitilini on 1922 and died on 1996 on Athens. He 
studied medicine in Athens and he became psychiatrist. He worked as a neurologist in many 
European countries. During the 2nd world war he was arrested by the Italians and he stayed in 
prison for some months. In addition of his poetry he wrote many essays about Greek literature 
and Greek language. 

 
[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Γεννήθηκε στη Μυτιλήνη το 1922 και πέθανε το 1996 στην Αθήνα. Σπούδασε ιατρική 
στην Αθήνα και έγινε ψυχίατρος. Εργάστηκε ως νευρολόγος σε πολλές ευρωπαϊκές χώρες. 
Κατά τη διάρκεια του 2ου παγκόσμιου πολέμου συνελήφθη από τους Ιταλούς και 
φυλακίστηκε για μερικούς μήνες. Εκτός της ποίησής του έγραψε πολλά δοκίμια για την 
ελληνική λογοτεχνία και την ελληνική γλώσσα. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    200                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Among the Elect 

(1958) 

 

Από του Εκλεκτούς 

(1958) 
 

I was among the party's elect. 
Always there at the parades, the meetings, 

the last to stop applauding. 
I was given a medley of medals and decorations, 

the black ribbon, the red garter. 
I won second prize for party spirit. 

The first (and from here on my troubles began) 
was given, naturally, to the one executed. And justly so, for 

he was the cause of all our tribulations, 
it was he who misled us with his tricks, 

with his crooked smiles, his austere ceremonials, 
but above all with his persistent 

dedication to the script. He, 
the linear man, the secretary, the proscriber 

(and finally the proscribed) 
the most elect of the party's elect. 

Translated by: Kimon Friar   

 

Ήμουν από τους εκλεκτούς του κόμματος. 
Στίς παρελάσεις πάντα εκεί, στις συνελεύσεις 
τελευταίος σταματούσα τα χειροκροτήματα. 
Πήρα μεταλλεία και παράσημα ποικίλα 
τη μέλαινα ταινία, την ερυθρωπή σφύρα· 
πήρα το δεύτερο βραβείον κομματικότητος. 

Το πρώτο (κι άπ' εδώ αρχινούν τα βάσανα) 
το πήρε φυσικά ό εκτελεσμένος. Καί δικαίως. 

Γιατί αυτός ήταν ή αιτία των δεινών 
αυτός πού μας παρέσυρε με τα τερτίπια του 

με τα γαμψά χαμόγελα, την αυστηρή του ενάσκηση 
και προ παντός με την επίμονη 

προσήλωση του στις γραφές. Αυτός 
ό γραμμικός, ό γραμματέας, ό προγραφών 

(καί τέλος ό προγεγραμμένος) 
από τους εκλεκτούς ό πιο εκλεκτός του κόμματος. 
Το μίσος όμως έβγαλε και κείνο τη φωνή του; 

«Ψαρού, τ' αγκίστρι, π' αφίσες, άλλου να ρίξης άμε». 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    201                            

 

  

[Index] 

Ouranis Kostas (1890 - 1953) 
 

 
 

 

Kostas Ouranis was born on 1890 in Istanbul and died on 1953 in Athens. As Greek 
Consul, as Secretary of the Ministry of Press, and as journalist, he travelled throughout 
Europe and Asia Minor and wrote many travel books and articles. The last of the Greek 
romantics, his poems, written in formal patterns of a lilting music, are windows of escape into 
the lost paradise of childhood wonders, into memory and nostalgia, an evocation of dream in 
an elegiac tone of causeless sorrow. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Kostas Ouranis was born on 1890 in Istanbul and died on 1953 in Athens. As Greek 
Consul, as Secretary of the Ministry of Press, and as journalist, he travelled throughout 
Europe and Asia Minor and wrote many travel books and articles. The last of the Greek 
romantics, his poems, written in formal patterns of a lilting music, are windows of escape into 
the lost paradise of childhood wonders, into memory and nostalgia, an evocation of dream in 
an elegiac tone of causeless sorrow.  

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    202                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

I shall die one day on a mournful 
twilight 

(1915) 

 

Θα πεθάνω ένα πένθιμο του 
φθινοπώρου δείλι  

(1915) 
 

I shall die one day on a mournful autumn twilight 
in my cold room where ! have lived alone; 

in my last anguish I shall hear the rain and all the  
familiar noises the street scatters. I shall die one day  
on a mournful autumn twilight amid furniture not mine 
 and scattered books; the street police shall find me in  

my bed and bury a man who had no history. 
Among my friends who now and then play cards 

someone will simply ask, "Has anyone seen 
Ouranis? He hasn't been around for days." 
Another, playing, will answer. "But he died!" 

They'll stop their playing a moment, cards in hand, 
shake their heads slowly, sorrowfully, and say, 

"Ah, what is man! He was living but yesterday!" 
And then renew their playing without a word. 

Some friend will write in the "small notices" 
that "poor Ouranis died abroad untimely, 

a youth well known amid our set, whose book 
of poems, just published, showed great promise." 

And this will be my life's last epitaph. Only my aged 
parents, of course, will weep, hold requiem with many, too 

many, priests, with all my friends attending, even my foes. I 
shall die one day on a mournful autumn twilight in a room 

strange to me, in noisy Paris, 
and some "Ketty," thinking I've jilted her for another, 

will write to curse me. But I shall be dead. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Θα πεθάνω ένα πένθιμο του φθινοπώρου δείλι 
μες στην κρύα μου κάμαρα όπως έζησα μόνος στη 
στερνήν αγωνία μου τη βροχή θέ ν' ακούω και τον 
κούφιο το θόρυβο πού ανεβάζει ό δρόμος. θα πεθάνω 
ένα πένθιμο του φθινοπώρου δείλι μέσα σ' έπιπλα 

ξένα και σε σκόρπια βιβλία θα με βρουν στο κρεβάτι 
μου, θέ να 'ρθεί ο αστυνόμος, θα με θάψουν σαν 

άνθρωπο πού δεν είχε ιστορία. Άπ' τους φίλους, πού 
παίζαμε πότε πότε χαρτιά, θα ρωτήσει κανένας τους, 
έτσι απλά: «Τον Ουράνη μην τον είδε κανείς; "Εχει 
μέρες πού χάθηκε....» Θ' απαντήσει άλλος παίζοντας: 
«Μ' αυτός έχει πεθάνει!» Μια στιγμή θα κοιτάζουνε ο 
καθένας τον άλλο, θα κουνήσουν περίλυπα και σιγά 
το κεφάλι, θέ να πουν: «Τ' είναι ό άνθρωπος!... Χτες 
ακόμα εζούσε..» Και βουβά το παιχνίδι τους θ' 

αρχινίσουνε πάλι. Κάποιος θα 'ναι συνάδελφος στα 
«ψιλά» πού θα γράψει, πώς «προώρως απέθανεν ο 
Ουρανής στην ξένην, νέος γνωστός εις τους κύκλους 
μας, πού 'χε κάποτε εκδώσει συλλογή με ποιήματα 

πολλά υποσχομένην». Κι αυτός θα 'ναι ο στερνός της 
ζωής μου επιτάφιος. Θα με κλάψουνε βέβαια μόνο οι 

γέροι γονιοί μου, και θα κάνουν μνημόσυνο με 
περίσσιους παπάδες, όπου θα 'ναι όλοι οι φίλοι μου 

- κι ίσως ίσως οι οχτροί μου. Θα πεθάνω ένα 
πένθιμο του φθινοπώρου δείλι σε μια κάμαρα ξένη, 
στο πολύβοο Παρίσι, και μια Κέττυ, θαρρώντας πώς 
την ξέχασα γι' άλλην, θα μου γράψει ένα γράμμα - 

και νεκρό θα με βρίσει... 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    203                            

 

  

Palamas Kostis (1859 - 1943) 
 

 
 

 

Palamas Kostis was born in Patras on 1859 and died in Athens on 1943. Kostis 
Palamas is the greatest modern Greek poet, second only to Solomos. With his twenty-volume, 
poetical work, which is both quantitatively and qualitatively great, he dominates the age he 
himself created. He began studying Greek and foreign poets and writing verse at the age of 
nine. Unlike the romantic poets, who wrote in puristic Greek, Palamas wrote in the 
vernacular. His poetry is multifaceted and leaves no subject, be it lyrical or contemplative, 
unsung. Everything moves him; history, philosophy, life. Palamas is a great lover of Greece 
and his verses rise up like a national prayer. Profound, symbolic, with pure panhuman 
idealism and effortless lyricism, Palamas created a whole new age and became the master for 
younger generations who are always influenced by his immortal art. He died during the Nazi 
German occupation over Greece and the whole of Athens was convulsed by his funeral 
service which was a landmark for the world of art and the nation. To the amazement of the 
occupying power, thousands of people escorted the poet to his final resting place, singing the 
National Anthem as they went. Angkelos Sikelianos bade him farewell with the words "On 
this coffin rests the whole of Greece."  

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Κωστής Παλαμάς γεννήθηκε στη Πάτρα το 1859 και πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1943. 
Είναι ο μεγαλύτερος σύγχρονος έλληνα ποιητής μετά τον Σολωμό. Με το εικοσάτομο 
ποιητικό του έργο ΄τόσο σε ποιότητα όσο και σε ποσότητα κατέβαλε την εποχή του. Άρχισε 
να μελετά Έλληνες και ξένους ποιητές και έγραψε τον πρώτο του στίχο σε ηλικία εννέα ετών.  
Αντίθετα από τους ρομαντικούς ποιητές, που έγραψαν στην καθαρεύουσα ο Παλαμάς έγραψε 
στην δημοτική. Η ποίησή του είναι πολύπλευρη και δεν άφησε κανένα θέμα, είτε λυρικό ή 
στοχαστικό ανέγγιχτο. Όλα τον ενέπνεαν, ιστορία, φιλοσοφία, ζωή. Ο Παλαμάς ήταν μεγάλος 
εραστής της Ελλάδας και οι στίχοι του ξεδιπλώνονται σαν μια εθνική προσευχή. Βαθύς, 
συμβολικός, με τον καθαρό πανανθρώπινο ιδεαλισμό και αβίαστο λυρισμό, ο Παλαμάς 
δημιούργησε μια νέα εποχή και έγινε ο εμπευστής για τις νεώτερες γενιές που επηρεάστηκαν 
από την αθάνατη τέχνη του. Πέθανε κατά τη διάρκεια της ναζιστικής κατοχής στην Ελλάδα 
και όλη η Αθήνα παραβρέθηκε στη νεκρική τελετή που αποτέλεσε ορόσημο για όλο τον 
κόσμο της τέχνης και του έθνους. Προς έκπληψη των δυνάμεων κατοχής, χιλιάδες άνθρωποι 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    204                            

 

  

συνόδευσαν τον ποιητή στην τελευταία του κατοικία τραγουδώντας τον εθνικό ύμνο στη 
διαδρομή. Ο Άγγελος Σικελιανός στον αποχαιρετιστήριο λόγο του έκλεισε με τις λέξεις "σε 
αυτό το φέρετρο αναπαύεται όλη η Ελλάδα." 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    205                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Ο Ολυμπιακός Ύμνος 

(1895) 

 

The Olympic Anthem 

(1895) 

Αρχαίο Πνεύμ' αθάνατο, αγνέ πατέρα 
του ωραίου, του μεγάλου και τ' αληθινού, 
κατέβα, φανερώσου κι άστραψ' εδώ πέρα 
στην δόξα της δικής σου γης και τ' ουρανού. 

 
Στο δρόμο και στο πάλεμα και στο λιθάρι, 
στων ευγενών Αγώνων λάμψε την ορμή, 
και με τ' αμάραντο στεφάνωσε κλωνάρι 
και σιδερένιο πλάσε κι άξιο το κορμί. 

 
Κάμποι, βουνά και θάλασσες φέγγουν μαζί σου 

σαν ένας λευκοπόρφυρος μέγας ναός, 
και τρέχει στο ναό εδώ, προσκυνητής σου, 

Αρχαίο Πνεύμ' αθάνατο, κάθε λαός. 
 

 
Translated by: Free Internet Translation 

Immortal spirit of antiquity, 
Father of the true, beautiful and good, 

Descend, appear, shed over us thy light 
Upon this ground and under this sky 

Which has first witnessed the unperishable fame. 
Give life and animation to those noble games! 

Throw wreaths of fadeless flowers to the victors 
In the race and in the strife! 

Create in our breasts, hearts of steel! 
In thy light, plains, mountains and seas 

Shine in a roseate hue and form a vast temple 
To which all nations throng to adore thee, 

Oh immortal spirit of antiquity! 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    206                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The Satyr or The song of nakedness 

(1912) 

 

Ο Σάτυρος ή το γυμνό τραγούδι 

(1912) 
 

Around us all is nakedness, All things arc naked here, The 
hills, the plains, the heavens' rim, The boundless day is 

clear. Creation gleams, and free and wide The world's whole 
palace lies; Enjoy your fill of rhythm, guitars, And you of 

light, Ο eyes! 
 

Here trees are sparse and have no place, A blemish rarely 
seen, The landscape is an unmixed wine And nakedness is 

queen. A shadow is a wonderment; Even on the lips of 
Night, To glimmer in her brooding smile, There dawns a ray 

of light. 
 

Bare-breasted is all Nature here And lusting without shame; 
The barren rock glows like a star, The body like a flame. 
And everywhere are rubies, pearls, And gold and silver 

shine; They crown, Ο peerless Attica,               Your 
nakedness divine! 

 
Virility is here a spell, The flesh becomes a fire, 

Virginity is Artemis And Hermes is desire. 
Here every hour in nakedness, A wonder of the foam. 
Fair Aphrodite rises up To make the world her home. 

 
Come, strip yourself of all attire, Let nakedness remain, Ο 

Soul, priestess of nakedness, 
The body is your fane. Attracting amber of the flesh 

My fingers now incline, Give me to drink of nakedness 
The rich Olympian wine. 

 
Tear off your veil and throw aside That gown that hides your 
grace, And, paired with Nature, thus display Your sculptured 
form and face.                       Cast loose your girdle; on your 

 

 Όλα γυμνά τριγύρω μας, όλα γυμνά εδώ  πέρα, κάμποι, 
βουνά, ακροούρανα, ακράταγ' είναι η  μέρα. Διάφαν' η 

πλάση, ολάνοιχτα τα ολόβαθα  παλάτια, το φως 
χορτάστε,  μάτια, κιθάρες, το  ρυθμό. 

 
Εδώ είν' αριά κι' αταίριστα λεκιάσματα τα δέντρα, κρασί 
είν' ο κόσμος άκρατο, εδώ ειν' η γύμνια αφέντρα. Εδώ 
είν' ο ίσκιος όνειρο, εδώ χαράζει   ακόμα στης νύχτας 

ταχνό στόμα χαμόγελο ξανθό. 
 

Εδώ τα πάντα ξέστηθα κι αδιάντροπα  λυσσάνε, αστέρι 
είν' ο ξερόβραχος, και το κορμί φωτιά ναι Ρουμπίνια 
εδώ,  μαλάματα, μαργαριτάρια, ασήμια, μοιράζει ή θεία 

σου γύμνια, τρισεύγενη Αττική! 
 

Εδώ ο λεβέντης μάγεμα, ή σάρκα αποθεώθη, οι 
παρθενίες, Αρτέμιδες, Ερμήδες είναι οι πόθοι. Εδώ 

κάθε ώρα ολόγυμνη θάμα στα υγρόζωα κήτη, πετιέται 
κ' ή Αφροδίτη και χύνεται παντού. 

 
Παράτησε το φόρεμα και με τη γύμνια ντύσου, Ψυχή, 

της γύμνιας ιέρισσα, ναός είναι το κορμί σου. 
Μαγνήτεψε τα χέρια  μου, της σάρκας κεχριμπάρι, 
τόλύμπιο  το νεχτάρι της γύμνιας δός να πιώ. 

 

Τον πέπλο, πέταξε τον άμοιαστο χιτώνα και με τη φύση 
ταίριασε την πλαστική σου εικόνα. Λύσε τη   ζώνη, 
σταύρωσε τα χέρια στην καρδιά σου πορφύρα τα 

μαλλιά σου μακρόσυρτη στολή. 
 

Και γίνε ατάραχο άγαλμα, και, το κορμί σου ας   πάρει 
της τέχνης την εντέλεια πού λάμπει στο   λιθάρι και 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    207                            

 

  

heart Gross your slim-fingered hands, And make a royal 
long-trained robe Of your hair's purple strands. 

 
A marble statue then become And let your body own The 
calm perfection of the art That glimmers in a stone; And 

mime and personate, in all The nakedness of thought, The 
nimble creatures of the wild, The snakes and birds 

uncaught. 
 

And play and frolic with all things 
That lithe and joyful seem, Idealise your nakedness 

And make of it a dream. The rounded contours and the 
straight, The lines, the curves, the glance  

Ο shiverings of ecstasy, Acclaim the sensuous dance! 
 

Ο forehead, eyes, and waving hair, Ο lips and loins and 
thighs, Each secret hiding-place of Love, Roses, embraces, 
sighs! Ο burning limbs that twine and bind, Ο hands that 
cling and thrill, Caressing ring-doves of desire, Hawks to 

assail the will! 
 

Speak from the panting heart, Ο mouth, And flowing be, Ο 
words, As sweet as comb of honey bees, 

Eager as homing birds. The alabaster lily buds, 
Pale grails of April, shrink With envy of your breasts' white 

cups I thirst. Oh let me drink! 
 

Drink from your rounded rose-tipped 
 breasts, Erect and marble-white, The milk of 

 passion that I dreamed, The milk of your delight. I am your 
mystic hierophant, My altars are your knees, 

And in the fire of your embrace Gods work their prodigies. 
 

Away from us all things unfit, The clothed and the 
concealed, All crippled and ill-favoured things, Unclean and 
unrevealed. Stand proudly, all the bare and pure, Breasts, 
bodies, in the sun, For nakedness is also truth And beauty 

merged in one. 

παίξε και παράστησε με της ιδέας τη γύμνια  τα 
λυγερά ταγρίμια, τα  φίδια, τα πουλιά. 

 
Και παίξε και παράστησε τα ηδονικά, τα ωραία, 
λαγάρισε τη γύμνια σου και κάμε την ιδέα.Τα 

στρογγυλά, τα ολόισα, χνούδια, γραμμές, καμπύλες, ω 
θείες ανατριχίλες, χορεύτε ένα χορό. 

 
Μέτωπο, μάτια, κύματα μαλλιά, γλουτοί,   λαγόνες, 

κρυφά λαγκάδια, του Έρωτα ρόδα, μυρτιές, κρυψώνες, 
πόδια πού αλυσοδένατε, βρύσες του χάϊδιου, ω χέρια, 

του πόθου περιστέρια, γεράκια του χαμού! Και 
ολόκαρδα κι' αμπόδιστα λογάκια, ω στόμα, ω στόμα. 

 
σαν το κερί της μέλισσας, σαν του ροδίου το χρώμα. Τα 
κρίνα ταλαβάστρινα του απρίλη θυμιατήρια, ζηλεύουν 

τα ποτήρια του κόρφου σου."Ω ! να πιώ, 
 

Να πιώ  στα ροδοχάραγα, στα ορθά-, στα σμαλτωμένα, 
το γάλα πού ονειρεύτηκα, της ευτυχίας, εσένα. Εγώ  
είμαι  ιεροφάντής σου, βωμοί τα γόνατα σου, στην 

πύρινη αγκαλιά σου θεοί   θαματουργούν. 
 

Μακριά μας όσα αταίριαστα, ντυμένα και κρυμμένα, τα 
μισερά και τάσκημα και ακάθαρτα και ξένα, ορθά όλα 
ξεσκεπά άδολα. γη, αιθέρες, κορμιά, στήθια, Γύμνια 

είναι κι' η αλήθεια, και γύμνια κ' η ομορφιά. 
Στη γύμνια την  ηλιόκαλη της αθηναίας ημέρας κι 

ανίσως και φάνταξη σου κάτι άντυπο σαν τέρας, κάτι 
σα δέντρο αφύλλιαστο και  δίχως  ίσκιου χάρη, 

αδούλευτο λιθάρι, ξεραγκιανό κορμί, 
 

Κάτι γυμνό και ξέσκεπο στα  ολανοιγμένα πλατιά, που 
ζωντανό θα τοδειχναν μόνο δυό   φλόγες   μάτια, κάτι 

πού από τους σάτυρους κρατιέται, και είν' αγρίμι, και 
είν' η φωνή του ασήμι, μη  φύγεις  είμ '  εγώ ,  Ο 

Σάτυρος.   Και   ρίζωσα σαν την ελιά   εδώ πέρα, 
λιγώνω τους αγέρηδες με τη βαθιά φλογέρα και παίζω   



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    208                            

 

  

 
If in the sun-scared nakedness Of the Athenian 

 day, You should imagine that you meet 
A monster on your way, A creature unclothed  

like a tree Stripped of its shady green, 
A figure of rough-fashioned stone, A body  

gaunt and lean. 
 

A creature naked and uncouth Beneath the open skies, 
Something whose only sign of life Is in two flaming eyes, 

Something of the old satyr breed That wanders wild and shy 
With chimes of sliver in its voice -Flee not: for it is I, The 

Satyr.  
 

Like the olive-tree Here have I struck my root; 
I make the breezes moan desire With, my deep-sounding 

flute. I play and all things meet and mate, 
Love pleading and assent, I play and all join in the dance: 

Man, Beast, and Element. 

Translated by: unknown  

και  παντρεύονται, λατρεύονται, λατρεύουν, 
και παίζω  και χορεύουν άνθρωποι,  ζά, στοιχιά. 

 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    209                            

 

  

[Index] 

Papadhitsas Dhimitris (1922 - 1987) 
 

 
 

 

Papadhitsas Dhimitris was born on 1922 in island of Samos where he died on 1987. 
He took his degree in medicine at the University of Athens and he continued his studies at the 
University of Munich. His modern poetry has received many honors, among others the First 
State Prize for Poetry for 1963 and for 1980. His poems have been translated in English and 
in French.  

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Δημήτρης Παπαδίτσας γεννήθηκε το 1922 στη Σάμο και πέθανε το 1987. 
Απποφοίτησε από την Ιατρική σχολή του Πανεπιστημίου Αθηνών και συνέχισε τις μελέτες 
του στο Πανεπιστήμιο του Μόναχου. Η σύγχρονη ποίησή του έχει λάβει πολλές διακρίσεις 
μεταξύ άλλων το πρώτο κρατικό βραβείο για την ποίηση το 1963 και το 1980. Τα ποιήματά 
του έχουν μεταφραστεί στα αγγλικά και στα γαλλικά.  

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    210                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The cypress tree 

(1958) 

 

Το κυπαρίσσι 

(1958) 
 

There at the edge of the world is the cypress tree, it's heart 
is the hand That desiccated by your flaming voice cannot give 
greetings   Nor spread its dust that the living plants may pass 

From the edge of the most defeated conversation were you 
saved Holding in your hands a last animal, locking up in your 

eyes A last cry, setting free the body from the smallest fire The 
smallest the slightest the almost nonexistent fire Ο green herb 

descending from the sky Into the water where you function       
That are scattered like a sunray on a stilleto's blade          

That for so many centuries have eaten honey from my body To 
whom I call, at times dead and at times insane from meteors that 

vanish in a corner of my brain 
You, my cypress tree, two pieces from the hatchet of time With 
your laughter like round fruit in baskets held by rosy arms, 

my cypress tree which no hand 
Can separate from me. whose height no span can measure 
Cypress tree of water and priceless essence, of sweat most dearly 

paid for                                            
Of a speech battered by a thousand banners, by  

hammers made out of all things Out of the poor and desolate 
elm tree even to the turtle's infant 

and the clocks of rock strata What do you seek in the sea, 
why do you sleep by the side of fish remains                  

And your sleep with its colored threads embroiders my skin 
Cypress tree with androgynous form and features. 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 
Στην άκρη του κόσμου είναι το κυπαρίσσι, η καρδιά του 
είναι το χέρι Πού ξερό απ' την πύρινη φωνή σου δε 

μπορεί να χαιρετήσει Ούτε ν' απλώσει τη σκόνη του να 
διαβούν τα ζωντανά φυτά Από την άκρη της πιο 

ηττημένης ομιλίας σώθηκες εσύ Κρατώντας στα χέρια 
σου ένα τελευταίο ζώο, κλειδώνοντας στο μάτι σου Μια 
τελευταία κραυγή, απελευθερώνοντας το σώμα της πιο 
μικρής φωτιάς Της πιο μικρής της ελάχιστης της 

σχεδόν ανύπαρχτης φωτιάς Ω εσύ πράσινο βοτάνι απ' 
τον ουρανό καταγόμενο Στο νερό πού λειτουργείς Πού 
σκορπίζεσαι όπως ή αχτίδα στην πλευρά του στιλέτου 
Πού τόσους αιώνες τρως απ’ το κορμί μου μέλι Πού σε 
φωνάζω πότε πεθαμένος και πότε τρελός από μετεωρίτες 

πού σβήνουν σε μια γωνιά του μυαλού μου Εσύ 
κυπαρίσσι μου δυο κομμάτια άπ' του καιρού το 
τσεκούρι Με τα γέλια σου στρογγυλά φρούτα σε 

πανέρια πού κρατούν 
μπράτσα ρόδινα, κυπαρίσσι μου πού κανένα χέρι Δε 
μπορεί να σε αποχωρίσει από έμενα, πού καμιά πιθαμή 
δε μπορεί να μετρήσει το ύψος σου Κυπαρίσσι από 

νερό και ουσία πανάκριβη, από ιδρώτα 
ακριβοπληρωμένον Από λόγο κοπανισμένο με χιλιάδες 
σφυριά, με σφυριά καμωμένα άπ' όλα τα πράγματα Άπ' 
τη φτωχή κι έρημη φτελιά μέχρι το μωρό της χελώνας 

και τα ρολόγια των πετρωμάτων Τι ζητάς στη θάλασσα, 
γιατί κοιμάσαι πλάι σε απομεινάρια ψαριών Κι ο ύπνος 
σου με τις χρωματιστές κλωστές του κεντάει το δέρμα μου 

Κυπαρίσσι με αντρόγυνη όψη. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    211                            

 

  

[Index] 

Papatsonis Takis (1895 - 1976) 
 

 
 

 

Papatsonis Takis was born on 1895 in Athens and died there on 1976. By profession 
an economist, he became a General Director of the Ministry of Economics, a life member of 
the Financial Council of the High Administrative Court, and for many years represented 
Greece on various economic missions throughout Europe and in Cuba. He also served as 
Deputy Chairman of the Commercial bank of Greece. In addition to his poetry he has 
published books of contemplation and aesthetics, and was the first to translate Eliot's The 
Waste Land into Greek. Influenced not only by Byzantine but also by Roman Catholic 
doctrine and ritual, he is predominantly a religious poet with an inclination toward mysticism 
and naturalism, tempered by an erotic strain. 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Τάκης Παπατσώνης γεννήθηκε το 1895 στην Αθήνα και πέθανε το 1976. Ήταν 
οικονομολόγος και έγινε Γενικός Γραμματέας του Υπουργείου Οικονομικών, ισόβιο μέλος  
του οικονομικού Συμβουλίου του ανώτατου διοικητικού δικαστηρίου, και για πολλά χρόνια 
αντιπροσώπευε την Ελλάδα στις διάφορες οικονομικές αποστολές σε όλη την Ευρώπη. 
Υπήρξε και αναπληρωτής πρόεδρος της Εμπορικής Τράπεζας της Ελλάδας. Εκτός από την 
ποίησή του έχει δημοσιεύσει και βιβλία σχεδίου και αισθητικής, και ήταν ο πρώτος που 
μετέφρασε Eliot στα ελληνικά. Επηρεασμένος όχι μόνο από το βυζαντινό αλλά και από το 
ρωμαϊοκαθολικό δόγμα, είναι κυρίως θρησκευτικός ποιητής με μια κλίση προς το μυστικισμό 
και τα νατουραλισμό.  

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    212                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Before the advent 

(1921) 

 

Προ της ελεύσεως 

(1921) 
 

I feel myself to he a man disgraced, 
walking nightlong and daylong beyond the Paling 

of a Garden lush with fountains and flowers, 
waiting in vain for the Great Gate to open again, and to 

admit me. And I am tired with the remembrance only of the 
evil life 1 have lived to this day. 

And I am downhearted because I am thwarted now 
when I long to lie down under the foliage of the Shadow of 
Grace. And the dumb beasts, the Hens and the Hares. 
the Pigeons and the Bats, wander freely in the Bushes; 

the Honeybees sing, and the Snails, 
after the ram. proceed in their Easter Barouches. 

Only I, by the Paling, like a Poacher or Beggar 
expelled by the Gardeners and the Wicked Servants.         

come near to dying in the oppressive dampness            
of whole winter nights in the freezing North Winds.           
Nor can I run off again into that City of Tumult           

where I behold the embrace of Evil opening for me          
with a warm welcome. For I am gripped                   

with nausea at the sight of her only.                    
I cry out. I cry out by the Threshold of the Outer Door, I 

cry out like a False Prophet derided by a l l :           
"Open the Church at least for me that I may go           

there where you suffer the stray Tramps of the mountains. 
"But no mercy is heard for the entreating voice. Punishment 
buffets me about like snow-beaten Winter, like unbearable 

Cold with no fire, no bed.                              
no roof, no food, nor pity, nor forgiveness,                 

and snowbound Christmas approaches.                    
The Shepherds take down their Flutes, dust oil the Church 

Organs, and the Magi watch the Heavens daylong and 
nightlong to find the Star of the newly born Infant God. A 

 

Αισθάνομαι κηλιδωμένος άνθρωπος να είμαι,           
μερόνυχτα να περπατώ έξω από Κάγκελα              
πλουσίου Περιβολιού με άνθη και στέρνες,             

και να μη βλέπω να ξανοίγεται η Μεγάλη Πόρτα για να 
μπω. Και έχω μια κούραση, μόνο με την ανάμνηση της 

κακίας πώχα ζήσει ως τα σήμερα ζωής! Και μια 
δυσθυμία γιατί μ' εμποδίζουν, τώρα πού επιθύμησα, να 

ξαπλωθώ κάτου απ’ τα φυλλώματα της ισκιερής 
Καλοσύνης. Και τα κουτά τα ζώα, Λαγοί και Νυχτερίδες, 

Κότες και Περιστέρια, ελεύθερα γυρίζουν στους 
Θάμνους. Τραγουδάν τα Μελίσσια. Και τα Σαλιγκάρια, 

ύστερ’ άπ' τη βροχή, πηγαίνουν αμαξάδα 
Πασχαλιάτικη. Μονάχα εγώ, στα Κάγκελα, σα 
Λαθροθήρας, σα Ζητιάνος, διωκόμενος άπ' τους 

Περιβολάρηδες και τις κακές τις Ύπερέτριες, πλησιάζω 
να πεθάνω, στην υγρασία την πνιγερή νυχτών 
ολόκληρων χειμωνιάτικων και στους παγερούς 

Βοριάδες. Ούτε να φύγω πού ξαναμπορώ στην Πολιτεία 
του Θορύβου, πού βλέπω την αγκάλη της Κακίας, σε 

θερμήν υποδοχή να μου ξανοίγεται. Άλλ' αηδία σφιχτά 
με περιζώνει, στο μόνο αντίκρυσμα της. Φωνάζω, 

φωνάζω, στο Κατώφλι της Οξώπορτας, φωνάζω, σαν 
Ψευδοπροφήτης, καταφρονεμένος άπ' όλους: 
Τουλάχιστον στην Έκκλησίαν, ανοιχτέ μου να 

διευθυνθώ, εκεί πού δέχεσθε τους Πλανωμένους Αλήτες 
των Βουνών. Και δεν ακούγεται ευσπλαχνία στη δεητική 

φωνή. Ή Τιμωρία με κολαφίζει σα Χειμώνας 
χιονοδαρμένος, σαν ανυπόφορη Παγωνιά, δίχως φωτιά, 
δίχως οίκτο και συχώρεση. Πλησιάζουνε τα Χιονισμένα 
Χριστούγεννα, ξεκρεμνάνε τα Φλάουτα οι Ποιμένες, 
ξεσκονίζουνε τα Όργανα στις εκκλησιές, και οι Μάγοι 
νυχτόημερα κοιτάζουν το Στερέωμα, του Νέου Μικρού 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    213                            

 

  

small Ray of life and warmth, like a glowworm  behind a 
Hedge in a dead Midnight of Vigilance, reaches even to 
me. Can it be they will come for me also, the Angels, the 

Village Visitors, with their joyful Caroling? 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

Θεού το Άστρο ν' ανακαλύψουν. Μικρήν Αχτίδα ζωής 
και ζέστας, πίσωθε από Φράχτη, σαν Πυγολαμπίδα, σε 

βαθειά Μεσάνυχτα Αγρυπνίας, έφτασε ως εμένα. 
Μήπως έρθουν και για μένα οι Άγγελοι, οι Έπισκέφτες 
των χωριών, με τα χαρούμενα τα Κάλαντα;Το μίσος 

όμως έβγαλε και κείνο τη φωνή του; 
«Ψαρού, τ' αγκίστρι, π' αφίσες, άλλου να ρίξης άμε». 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    214                            

 

  

[Index] 

Patrikios Titos (1928) 
 

 
 

 

Patrikios Titos was born on 1928 in Athens. In 1943 he joined the United Panhellenic 
Organization of Youth, in 1944 the National Popular Liberation Army, and took part in the. 
war: fare. Arrested by Greek collaborators in 1944, he was set up against a church wall to be 
shot, but the execution was cancelled at the last moment. As one of the founders of 
Epitheorisi Tehnis (Review of the Arts), he served on the editorial board for five years, but at 
the same time worked as translator, newspaper reporter and lawyer. He left for Paris in 1959, 
and until 1964 took post-graduate work in sociology and philosophy at the Sorbonne and the 
Ecole Ptatique de hautes Etudes. Two of his studies were published by UNESCO first in 
French, then in English, Russian and Spanish. After the fall of the dictatorship, he returned to 
Athens, where he has lived ever since. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Τίτος Πατρίκιος γεννήθηκε το 1928 στην Αθήνα. Κατά τη διάρκεια της γερμανικής 
κατοχής πήρε μέρος στην Εθνική Αντίσταση, στρατευμένος αρχικά στην ΕΠΟΝ και στη 
συνέχεια στον ΕΛΑΣ. Το 1944 καταδικάστηκε σε θάνατο από συνεργάτες των γερμανών και 
η εκτέλεσή του ματαιώθηκε την τελευταία στιγμή. Ιδρυτικό μέλος του περιοδικού 
Επιθεώρηση Τέχνης από το 1954 δημοσίευσε πολλά άρθρα και κριτικές στις στήλες του, ενώ 
πολλά δοκίμιά του συμπεριλήφθηκαν σε συγκεντρωτικές εκδόσεις. Παράλληλα εργάστηκε ως 
μεταφραστής, δημοσιογράφος εφημερίδων και δικηγόρος. Από το 1959 ως το 1964 σπούδασε 
κοινωνιολογία στην Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes του Παρισιού και πήρε μέρος σε 
έρευνες του Εθνικού Κέντρου Επιστημονικής Έρευνας της Γαλλίας. Δύο από τις μελέτες του 
δημοσιεύθηκαν από την ΟΥΝΕΣΚΟ πρώτα στα γαλλικά, έπειτα στα αγγλικά, ρωσικά και 
ισπανικά. Μετά από την πτώση της δικτατορίας, επέστρεψε στην Αθήνα. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    215                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Verses 2 

(1963) 

 

Στίχοι 2 

(1963) 
 

Verses that howl Verses  that rise, as if they're bayonets 
verses that threaten the established order  and in their few feet make 
or break the revolution useless, false, boastful because today 

no verse topples regimes no verse mobilizes the masses.           
(What masses? now, between us  who thinks of the masses? at 

most a personal deliverance, if not recognition)                        
That's why I no longer write in order to offer paper guns 

weapons made of babbling, hollow words.                 
But only to lift up a small corner of the truth                

to cast a little light on our counterfeit life.                  
As much as I can, as long as I endure. 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Στίχοι που κραυγάζουν στίχοι πού ορθώνονται τάχα 
σαν ξιφολόγχες στίχοι που απειλούν την καθεστηκυία 

τάξη και, μέσα στους λίγους πόδες τους κάνουν ή 
ανατρέπουν την επανάσταση, άχρηστοι, ψεύτικοι, 
κομπαστικοί. γιατί κανένας στίχος σήμερα δεν 

ανατρέπει, καθεστώτα κανένας στίχος δεν κινητοποιεί  
τις μάζες. Ποιες μάζες; Μεταξύ μας τώρα ποιοι 

σκέφτονταί τις μάζες; Το ,πολύ μια λύτρωση ατομική, αν 
όχι ανάδειξη.) Γι’ αυτό κι εγώ δε γράφω πια Για να 

προσφέρω χάρτινα  ντουφέκια 
όπλα από λόγια  φλύαρα και, κούφια 

Μόνο μιαν άκρη της αλήθειας να σηκώσω 
να ρίξω λίγο φως στην πλαστογραφημένη μας ζωή 

Όσο μπορώ, κι όσο κρατήσω 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    216                            

 

  

[Index] 

Pittas Triantafillos (1924 - 1990) 
 

 
 

 

Triantafillos Pittas was born in Soufli Thrace on 1912 and died in Athens on 1997. He 
has written poems  novels and essays. In his poems reveals the hidden human desires, the 
tragedy of the human soul . 

 [Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Τριαντάφυλλος Πίττας γεννήθηκε στο Σουφλί το 1912 και πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 
1997. Έχει γράψει μυθιστορήματα, δοκίμια και ποιήματα. Στα ποιήματά του αποκαλύπτει τις 
κρυμμένες ανθρώπινες επιθυμίες, τη τραγωδία της ανθρώπινης ψυχής. 

 [Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    217                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Marginal People 

 

Οι Περιθώριοι 
 

Subcutaneous insects guide us 
into these cities whose backs are bent 

by the will of the unclean. 
Our lips are prisoners of vertigo bloodstained 

 daggers against our breath subterranean  
pulses in profane blood. Alone in the  

dressingrooms of remorse Alone in the gloomy hopeless 
margin No space no landscape around us 

swaddled into a cocoon of scorn 
we gather our body's dried sand 

with no complaint, no tear, and no hope. "Fisherwoman, 
take your hook and go cast elsewhere". 

Translated by:  Mundus Artium   

 

Υποδόρεια έντομα μας οδηγούν 
στίς πολιτείες τοϋτες πού καμπουριάζουν 

από τη βούληση των ρυπαρών 
Τα χείλη μας αιχμάλωτα στον ίλιγγο ματωμένα 

εγχειρίδια στην πνοή μας υποχθόνιος σφυγμός στο 
βέβηλο αίμα Μόνοι στα αποδυτήρια του ονείρου Μόνοι 

στο ζοφερό άνέλπιδο περιθώριο 
Καμιά έκταση κανένα τοπίο γύρω μας φασκιωμένοι σ' 
ένα. βομβίκιο από χλεύη μαζεύουμε την άργιλλο του 
κορμιοϋ μας χωρίς παράπονο χωρίς δάκρυα χωρίς 

ελπίδα. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    218                            

 

  

[Index] 

Polemis Ioannis (1862 - 1925) 
 

 
 

 

Polemis Ioannis was born on 1862 in Athens, though his family hailed from the island 
of Andros in the Cyclades. He died in 1925. He was a Greek poet, part of the 1880s revivalist 
movement in Greek poetry. Polemis' poetry is written in straightforward, simple language and 
has long been included in Greek primary school textbooks. They are of a romantic and or 
patriotic nature. Probably his greatest prose work is the drama "King Sun-less" which was 
brought to the stage and starred no less an actress than Marika Kotopouli. 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Ιωάννης Πολέμης γεννήθηκε το 1862 στην Αθήνα, αν και η οικογένειά του 
καταγόταν από το νησί της Άνδρου και πέθανε το 1925. Ο Ιωάννης Πολέμης ανήκει στη Νέα 
Σχολή ποιητών που αντιτάχτηκε στην υπερβολή και τον άκρατο ρομαντισμό, ενώ παράλληλα 
καθιέρωσε (όπως οι Παλαμάς, Δροσίνης) τη δημοτική γλώσσα στην ποίησή του και ποιήματά 
του έχουν περιληφθεί στα σχολικά βιβλία πρωτοβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης. Πιθανώς η μέγιστη 
εργασία του είναι το δράμα "Βασιλιάς ανήλιαγος" που παρουσιάστηκε στη σκηνή από την 
ηθοποιό Μαρίκα Κοτοπούλη. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    219                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Epigramme (to Byron) 

 

Επίγραμμα (στον Βύρωνα) 
 

Glory that with innocent hands, with hands purified and with 
an immaculate blade, a blade holy and clean cut fresh 
branches of Delphic laurel tree and tied them in haste 

making a wreath for ever green to crown you in your last 
bed since you fell,                 death has crowned her as well. 

 

Translated by:  Balkan Studies   

 

Τη Δόξα, πού με χέρια αγνά, χέρια καθάρια και με 
δρεπάνι αμόλυντο, ιερό δρεπάνι, έκοψε δάφνης 
δελφικής χλωρά κλωνάρια κ' έπλεξε βιαστικά το 

αμάραντο στεφάνι για να σε στεφάνωση στη στερνή 
σου κλίνη, o θάνατος σου τη στεφάνωσε κ' εκείνη. 

 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    220                            

 

  

[Index] 

Ritsos Yiannis (1909 - 1990) 
 

 
 

 

Ritsos Yannis was born on 1909 in Monemvasia, the Peloponnesos and died in Athens 
on 1990. He enrolled in the University of Athens in 1925 but fell ill of his family’s disease of 
tuberculosis and spent almost six years in various sanitariums. For his left-wing activities 
during the German-Italian Occupation and the Civil Wars that followed, he was incarcerated 
in various detention camps, 1948-52 and again after the military coup of 1967. His entire life 
has been primary a dedication to his political beliefs and his poetry, having published over 77 
books by 1980. He is also an accomplished painter, working on whatever material he can 
obtain, paper, stones, pebbles, bones. Haunted by death, driven at times to the edge of 
madness, Ritsos throughout his life has been upheld by an obstinate faith in poetry as 
redemption, and in the revolutionary ideal. When broke from formal poetry into free verse, he 
turned to themes that expressed the pain and endeavor of man to overcome his fate, the 
nostalgia of adolescence, and the durability of the Greek landscape. His short poems become 
terse, hard, objective, imagistic, symbolistic. Loneliness, death and decay remained some of 
his basic themes, the dynasty of chance, the tyranny of necessity, the totality of life in all its 
incomprehensibility. Lately he has turned to classical myth in which ancient situations are 
seen to be problematically modern. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιάννης Ρίτσος γεννήθηκε το 1909 στη Μονεμβασιά και πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 
1990. Γράφτηκε στο Πανεπιστήμιο της Αθήνας το 1925 αλλά αρρώστησε με φυματίωση και 
πέρασε σχεδόν έξι χρόνια σε διάφορα σανατόρια.Για τις μαρξιστικές του ιδέες κατά τη 
διάρκεια της γερμανο-ιταλικής κατοχής και του εμφυλίου φυλακίστηκε σε στρατόπεδα 
συγκεντρώσεως και εξορίστηκε σε διάφορα μέρη. Το ίδιο συνέβη και κατά τη διάρκεια της 
χούντας. Ολόκληρη η ζωή του ήταν μια αφιέρωση στις πολιτικές πεποιθήσεις του και την 
ποίησή του, δημοσιεύοντας πάνω από 77 βιβλία μέχρι το 1980. Είναι επίσης ένας 
καταξιωμένος ζωγράφος που εργάστηκε με διάφορα υλικά όπως χαρτί, πέτρα, χαλίκια και 
κόκκαλα. Κυνηγημένος από το θάνατο οδηγείθηκε κατά περιόδους στην τρέλα. Ο Ρίτσος όλη 
του τη ζωή στηριξε με επιμονή την ποίηση, και το επαναστατικό ιδεώδες. Όταν άλλαξε την 
ποίησή του σε ελέυθερο στίχο, επέλεξε θέματα που εξέφρασαν τον πόνο και την προσπάθεια 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    221                            

 

  

του ατόμου να υπερνικήσει τη μοίρα του, τη νοσταλγία της εφηβείας, και τη διάρκεια του 
ελληνικού τοπίου. Τα σύντομα ποιήματά του γίνονται σκληρά, αντικειμενικά, μαγευτικά και 
συμβολικά. Η μοναξιά, ο θάνατος και η αποσύνθεση παρέμειναν μερικά από τα βασικά 
θέματά του, η πιθανότητα της δυναστείας, η αναγκαστική τυραννία, η συνολική ζωή σε όλη 
την ακατανοησία. Τελευταία γυρίσε στον κλασσικό μύθο όπου αρχαίες καταστάσεις 
συναντώνται σαν προβλήματα στη σύγχρονη κοινωνία. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    222                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Romiosini 

(1945-47) 

 

Ρωμιοσύνη 

(1945-47) 
 
I 

These trees cannot adjust to lesser sky, 
these stones cannot adjust beneath the tread of strangers, 
these faces cannot adjust unless they feel the sun, these 

hearts cannot adjust unless they live in justice. This 
landscape is as harsh as silence,  

it hugs to its breast the scorching stones,  
clasps in its light the orphaned olive trees and vineyards, 
clenches its teeth. There is no water. Light only. Roads 

vanish in light and the shadow of the sheepfold is made of 
iron. 

Trees, rivers, and voices have turned to stone in the sun's 
quicklime. Roots trip on marble. Dust-covered lentisk 

shrubs.  Mules and rocks. All panting. There is no water. All 
are parched. For years now. All chew a morsel of sky to 

choke down their bitterness. 
 

Their eyes are bloodshot for lack of sleep, 
a deep furrow is wedged between their eyebrows 

like a cypress tree between two mountains at sunset. 
 

Their hands are welded to their rifles their rifles are 
extensions of their hands their hands are extensions of their 
souls anger lies upon their lips and anguish deep within their 

eyes like a star in a salt-pit. 

 
When they clasp hands, the sun becomes certain of the 
world, when they smile, a small swallow flies out of 

their savage beards, when they sleep, twelve stars fall 
out of their empty pockets, when they are killed, life 

sweeps up the ascent with kettledrums 
and flags flying. For so many years all have starved, all 

 

Ι 
Αυτά τα δέντρα δε βολεύονται με λιγότερο ουρανό, 
αυτές οι πέτρες δε βολεύονται κάτου απ’ τα ξένα 

βήματα, αυτά τα πρόσωπα δε βολεύονται παρά μόνο 
στον ήλιο, αυτές οι καρδιές δε βολεύονται παρά μόνο 

στο δίκιο. 
Ετούτο το τοπίο είναι σκληρό σαν τη σιωπή, 

σφίγγει στον κόρφο του τα πυρωμένα του λιθάρια, 
σφίγγει στο φως τις ορφανές ελιές του και τ' αμπέλια 

του, σφίγγει τα δόντια. Δεν υπάρχει νερό. Μονάχα φως. 
Ο δρόμος χάνεται στο φως κι ο ίσκιος της μάντρας είναι 

σίδερο. 
Μαρμάρωσαν τα δέντρα, τα ποτάμια κ’ οι φωνές μες 
στον ασβέστη του ήλιου. Η ρίζα σκοντάφτει στο 

μάρμαρο. Τα σκονισμένα σκοίνα. 
Το μουλάρι κι ο βράχος. Λαχανιάζουν. Δεν υπάρχει 
νερό. Όλοι διψάνε. Χρόνια τώρα. Όλοι μασάνε μια 

μπουκιά ουρανό  πάνου απ’ την πίκρα τους. Τα μάτια 
τους είναι κόκκινα απ’ την αγρύπνια, μια βαθειά 

χαρακιά σφηνωμένη ανάμεσα στα φρύδια τους σαν ένα 
κυπαρίσσι ανάμεσα σε δυο βουνά το λιόγερμα. 

Το χέρι τους είναι κολλημένο στο ντουφέκι  
το ντουφέκι είναι συνέχεια του χεριού τους  
το χέρι τους είναι συνέχεια της ψυχής τους  
έχουν στα χείλια τους απάνου το θυμό  

κ' έχουνε τον καημό βαθιά-βαθιά στα μάτια τους  
σαν ένα αστέρι σε μια γούβα αλάτι. 

Όταν σφίγγουν το χέρι, ο ήλιος είναι βέβαιος για τον 
κόσμο όταν χαμογελάνε, ένα μικρό χελιδόνι φεύγει μες 

απ’ τ’ άγρια γένεια τους 
όταν κοιμούνται, δώδεκα άστρα πέφτουν απ’ τις άδειες 

τσέπες τους όταν σκοτώνονται, η ζωή τραβάει την 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    223                            

 

  

have thirsted, all were slaughtered, 
besieged by land and sea;  drought has consumed their 

fields, brine has drenched their houses,  
the wind has knocked down their doors and the few 

shrubs in the village square, 
death comes and goes through the holes in their 
overcoats, their tongues have become as acrid as 

cypress cones,  their dogs have perished, wrapped up 
in their own shadows,  the rain beats down on their 

bones. Transfixed on their outposts they smoke cow-
dung and the night, 

scanning the frenzied sea where the broken mast of the 
moon has sunk. They have run out of bread, exhausted 

their ammunition, now they load their cannons with 
their hearts only. 

So many years besieged by land and sea, 
they are all starved, are all killed, yet no one has 
perished there on their outposts their eyes glow, 

a huge Hag, a great crimson conflagration, 
and every dawn a thousand doves soar out of their 

hands toward the four gates of the horizon. 
 

IV 
They pushed on straight into dawn with the disdain of 

hungry men, a star had thickened in their motionless eyes, 
they carried on their shoulders the stricken summer. The 
armies passed through here with banners clinging to their 

bodies,  with stubbornness clenched between their teeth like 
an acrid pear, 

with the moon's sand in their heavy army boots,  
with the coaldust of night sticking in their ears and nostrils. 
Tree by tree, stone by stone, they passed through the world, 
passed through sleep with thorns for pillow. They brought 

life like a river cupped in their parched hands. At every step 
they won a league of sky to give it away. At their outposts 
they turned to stone like scorched trees, and when they 
danced in the village squares the ceilings in the houses 

shook  

ανηφόρα με σημαίες και 
με ταμπούρλα. Τόσα χρόνια όλοι πεινάνε, όλοι διψάνε, 

όλοι σκοτώνονται πολιορκημένοι από στεριά, και 
θάλασσα, έφαγε η κάψα τα χωράφια τους κ’ η αρμύρα 

πότισε τα σπίτια τους  
ο αγέρας έρριξε τις πόρτες τους και τις λίγες πασχαλιές 
της πλατείας από τις τρύπες του πανωφοριού τους 

μπαινοβγαίνει ο θάνατος  
η γλώσσα τους είναι στυφή σαν το κυτταρισσόμηλο 
πέθαναν τα σκυλιά τους τυλιγμένα στον ίσκιο τους  η 

βροχή χτυπάει στα κόκκαλά τους. Πάνου στα καραούλια 
πετρωμένοι καπνίζουν τη σβουνιά και τη νύχτα 

βιγλίζοντας το μανιασμένο πέλαγο όπου βούλιαξε  
το σπασμένο κατάρτι του φεγγαριού. 
Το ψωμί σώθηκε, τα βόλια σώθηκαν, 

γεμίζουν τώρα τα κανόνια τους μόνο με την καρδιά τους. 
Τόσα χρόνια πολιορκημένοι από στεριά και θάλασσα  
όλοι πεινάνε, όλοι σκοτώνονται και κανένας δεν πέθανε 

πόνου στα καραούλια  άμπουνε τα μάτια τους, μια 
μεγάλη σημαία, μια μεγάλη φωτιά κατακόκκινη και κάθε 
αυγή χιλιάδες περιστέρια φεύγουν απ’ τα χέρια τους για 

τις τέσσερις πόρτες του ορίζοντα. 
 
ΙΙ 

Κάθε που βραδιάζει με το θυμάρι σουρουφλισμένο στον 
κόρφο της πέτρας είναι μια σταγόνα νερό που σκάβει 

από παλιά τη σιωπή ως το μεδούλι  
είναι μια καμπάνα κρεμασμένη στο γερο-πλάτανο που 
φωνάζει τα χρόνια. Σπίθες λαγοκοιμούνται στη χόβολη 
της ερημιάς κ’ οι στέγες συλλογιούνται το μαλαματένιο 

χνούδι στο πάνω χείλι 
του Αλωνάρη κίτρινο χνούδι σαν τη φούντα του 

καλαμποκιού καπνισμένο απ’ τον καημό της δύσης. Η 
Παναγία πλαγιάζει στις μυρτιές με τη φαρδειά της 

φούστα λεκιασμένη απ’ τα σταφύλια.  
Στο δρόμο κλαίει ένα παιδί και του αποκρίνεται απ’ τον 
κάμπο η προβατίνα πούχει χάσει τα παιδιά της. Ίσκιος 

στη βρύση. Παγωμένο το βαρέλι. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    224                            

 

  

          and the glassware clattered on the shelves. 
Ah, what songs shook the mountain summits! 

Between their knees they held the platter of the moon and 
ate, and squashed an Ah in the depths of their hearts as 
they would squash a louse between their coarse fingernails. 
Who will bring you now a warm loaf of bread in the night that 

you may feed your dreams?  
Who will stand in the shade of an olive tree to keep the 

cicada company lest the cicada fall silent,  
now that the whitewash of noon paints the low stone wall of the 

horizon all around, obliterating their great and virile 
names? This earth that smelled so fragrantly at daybreak, 
the earth that was theirs and ours their blood how fragrant 

that earth  and now how is it that our vineyards have 
locked us out,  

how has the light thinned out on roofs and trees,  
who can bear to say that half are now under the earth  
and the other half in chains? Though the sun waves you 

good-morning with so many leaves 
and the sky glitters with so many banners, these lie in 

chains and those under the earth. 
Be silent, the bells will ring out at any moment. 

This earth is theirs, this earth is ours. 
Under the earth, in their crossed hands 

they hold the bell rope, waiting for the hour, they do not sleep, 
they never die, waiting to ring in the resurrection. This 

earth is theirs and ours no one can take it from us. 
 

V 
They sat under the olive trees in the early afternoon 
sifting the ashy light through their coarse fingers, 

they unbuckled their cartridge belts, estimating how much toil 
could be crammed into the path of night,  

how much bitterness in the knots of the wild mallow,  
how much courage in the eyes of the barefoot boy who 

holds the flag aloft. In the field the last swallow had 
lingered late, balancing in the air like a black ribbon on the 
sleeve of autumn. Nothing else remained. Only the gutted 

Η κόρη του πεταλωτή με μουσκεμένα πόδια. 
Απάνου στο τραπέζι το ψωμί κ’ η ελιά, 

μες στην κληματαριά ο λύχνος του αποσπερίτη 
και κει ψηλά, γυρίζοντας στη σούβλα του, ευωδάει ο 

γαλαξίας καμένο ξύγκι, σκόρδο και πιπέρι. 
Α, τι μπρισίμι αστέρι ακόμα θα χρειαστεί 

για να κεντήσουν οι πευκοβελόνες στην καψαλισμένη 
μάντρα του καλοκαιριού "κι αυτό θα περάσει" πόσο θα 
στίψει ακόμα η μάνα την καρδιά της πόνου απ’ τα εφτά  

σφαγμένα παλληκάρια της  
ώσπου να βρει το φως το δρόμο του στην ανηφόρα της 
ψυχής της. Τούτο το κόκκαλο που βγαίνει από τη γης 
μετράει οργιά οργιά τη γης και τις κόρδες του λαγούτου 
και το λαγούτο αποσπερίς με το βιολί ως το χάραμα 
καημό καημό το λεν στα δυοσμαρίνια και στους 

πεύκους και ντιντινίζουν στα καράβια τα σκοινιά σαν 
κόρδες κι ο ναύτης πίνει πικροθάλασσα στην κούπα του 

Οδυσσέα. 
Α, ποιος θα φράξει τότες τη μπασιά και ποιο σπαθί θα 
κόψει το κουράγιο και ποιο κλειδί θα σου κλειδώσει την 
καρδιά που με τα δυο θυρόφυλλά της διάπλατα κοιτάει 
του θεού τ' αστροπερίχυτα  περβόλια; ‘Ωρα μεγάλη σαν 
τα Σαββατόβραδα του Μάη στη ναυτική ταβέρνα νύχτα 
μεγάλη σαν ταψί στου γανωτζή τον τοίχο μεγάλο το 
τραγούδι σαν ψωμί στου σφουγγαρά το δείπνο. 

Και να που ροβολάει τα τρόχαλα το κρητικό φεγγάρι 
γκαπ, γκαπ, με είκοσι αράδες προκαδούρα στα 

στιβάλια του, και νάτοι αυτοί που ανεβοκατεβαίνουνε τη 
σκάλα του Αναπλιού 

γεμίζοντας την πίπα τους χοντροκομμένα φύλλα από 
σκοτάδι, με το μουστάκι τους θυμάρι ρουμελιώτικο 

πασπαλισμένο αστέρι 
και με το δόντι τους πευκόρριζα στου Αιγαίου το βράχο 

και τοαλάτι. Μπήκαν στα σίδερα και στη φωτιά, 
κουβέντιασαν με τα λιθάρια, 

κεράσανε ρακί το θάνατο στο καύκαλο του παππούλη 
τους, στ’ Αλώνια τα ίδια αντάμωσαν το Διγενή και 
στρώθηκαν στο δείπνο κόβοντας τον καημό στα δυο 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    225                            

 

  

houses smoldering still. The others left us some time ago 
to lie under the stones, their shirts torn and their vows 
scratched on the fallen door. No one wept. We had no time. 

Only the silence grew deeper still, and the light down by the 
beach was as tidy as the housekeeping     of the murdered 

woman. 
What will happen to them now when the rain seeps into the earth 

with its rotted plane tree leaves?  
What will happen to them when the sun dries out in the woolen 
blanket of clouds like a squashed bedbug on a peasant's 

bed, when the stork of snows stands embalmed on the chimney 
stack of the previous night? 

Old mothers scatter salt into the fire, scatter earth over their 
hair,  uproot the vines of Monevasia lest even one grape 

sweeten the mouth of a foe;  
they have put the bones of their grandfathers in a sack 

together with their knives and forks  
and wander outside the wails of their homelands searching for a 
place in which to take root in the night. It would be hard 

for us to find a language 
less powerful less stony than that of the cherry tree 

those hands that remained in the fields 
or up the mountains or down under the sea 

do not forget, they never forget it will be hard for us to 
forget their hands, it will be hard for hands that grew 

callous on a trigger to ask questions of a daisy, 
to give thanks, resting on a knee or a book  

or on the breast of starlight, it will take time. And we must 
speak up. Until they find their bread and their rights. Two 

oars nailed in the sand in the storming dawn. Where is the 
fishing boat? 

A plow thrust into earth and the wind blowing.  
The earth scorched. Where is the plowman? 

Ashes the olive tree, the vineyard, and the house.  
Niggardly night with its stars in a peasant's sock.  

Dry bayleaves and oregano in the middle cupboard on the 
wall. The fire has not touched them. 

Blackened kettle in the hearth and the water boiling by itself  

έτσι που κόβανε στο γόνατο το κριθαρένιο τους καρβέλι. 
Έλα, κυρά με τ' αρμυρά ματόκλαδα, με 

φλωροκαπνισμένο χέρι  από την έγνοια του φτωχού κι 
απ1 τα πολλά τα χρόνια η αγάπη σε περμένει μες στα 

σκοίνα, 
μες στη σπηλιά του ο γλάρος σου κρεμάει το μαύρο 

κόνισμά σου κι ο πικραμένος αχινιός σου ασπάζεται το 
νύχι του ποδιού σου. Μέσα στη μαύρη ρώγα του 

αμπελιού κοχλάζει ο μούστος κατακόκκινος, κοχλάζει το 
ροδάμι στον καμένο πρίνο,  στο χώμα η ρίζα του νεκρού 
ζητάει νερό για να τινάξει ελάτι  κ’ η μάνα κάτου απ’ τη 

ρυτίδα της κρατάει γερά μαχαίρι.  
Έλα κυρά που τα χρυσά κλωσσάς αυγά του κεραυνού 
πότε μια μέρα θαλασσιά θα βγάλεις το τσεμπέρι και θα 
πάρεις πάλι τ’ άρματα να σε χτυπήσει κατακούτελα 
μαγιάτικο χαλάζι να σπάσει ρόιδι ο ήλιος στην 

αλατζαδένια σου ποδιά να τον μοιράσεις μόνη σου 
σπυρι-σπυρί στα δώδεκα ορφανά σου,  να λάμψει 

ολόγυρα ο γιαλός ως λάμπει η κόψη του σπαθιού και τ’ 
Απριλίου το χιόνι και να βγει στα χαλίκια ο κάβουρας 
για να λιαστεί και να σταυρώσει τις δαγκάνες του. 

 

ΙΙΙ 
Δω πέρα ο ουρανός δε λιγοστεύει ούτε στιγμή το λάδι 
του ματιού μας δω πέρα ο ήλιος παίρνει πάνω του το 

μισό βάρος της πέτρας που σηκώνουμε πάντα στη ράχη 
μας σπάνε τα κεραμίδια δίχως αχ κάτου απ' το γόνα του 
μεσημεριού οι άνθρωποι παν μπροστά απ’ τον ίσκιο 
τους σαν τα δελφίνια μπρος απ’ τα σκιαθίτικα καΐκια 
ύστερα ο ίσκιος τους γίνεται ένας αϊτός που βάφει τα 
φτερά του στο λιόγερμα και πιο ύστερα κουρνιάζει στο 

κεφάλι τους και συλλογιέται τ' άστρα όταν αυτοί 
πλαγιάζουνε στο λιακωτό με τη μαύρη σταφίδα. Δω 
πέρα η κάθε πόρτα έχει πελεκημένο ένα όνομα κάπου 

από τρεις χιλιάδες τόσα χρόνια κάθε λιθάρι έχει 
ζωγραφισμένον έναν άγιο μ’ άγρια μάτια και μαλλιά 

σκοινένια κάθε άντρας έχει στο ζερβί του χέρι 
χαραγμένη βελονιά τη βελονιά μια κόκκινη γοργόνα 

κάθε κοπέλα έχει μια φούχτα αλατισμένο φως κάτου απ’ 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    226                            

 

  

in the bolted house. They had no time to eat. 
On the threshing floor where one night the gallant young men 

took their supper 
the olive pits and the moon's dried blood remain  

with the folk meter of their guns.  
The cypress trees and laurel groves remain. 

Next day the sparrows ate the crumbs of army bread, 
children fashioned toys out of the matches  

with which the soldiers lit their cigarettes and the thorns of the 
stars. And the stone, on which they sat under the olive trees 

in early afternoon by the sea 
will be turned into whitewash in the kiln tomorrow, the day 
after tomorrow we shall whitewash our houses and the low 

stone wall of Saint Saviour, 
and the day after that we shall sow seed there where they 

slept and a pomegranate bud shall burst like a babe's first 
laughter on the sunlight's breast. 

Afterwards we shall sit on the ground to read all their 
hearts as though we were reading the history of the world for 

the first time. 
 

VII 
Every night the moon in the fields turns the magnificent 

dead over on their backs, 
searching their faces with savage, frozen fingers to find her son 
by the cut of his chin and his stony eyebrows, searching 

their pockets. She will always find something. There is 
always something to find. 

A locket with a splinter of the Cross. A stubbed-out 
cigarette. A key, a letter, a watch stopped at seven.  
We wind up the watch again. The hours plod on. 

When tomorrow their clothing rots away 
and they remain amid their army buttons 
like pieces of sky between summer stars, 

like the river between laurel shrubs, 
like the footpath meandering between lemon trees in early 

spring, we may then find their names and shout: I love. 
Then. But again these things are perhaps a little too 

τη φούστα της και τα παιδιά έχουν πέντε-έξι 
σταυρουλάκια πίκρα πάνου στην καρδιά τους σαν τα 
χνάρια απ’ το βήμα των γλάρων στην αμμουδιά το 

απόγευμα. Δε χρειάζεται να θυμηθείς. Το ξέρουμε. Όλα 
τα μονοπάτια βγάζουνε στα Ψηλαλώνια. Ο αγέρας είναι 
αψύς κεί πόνου. Όταν ξεφτάει απόμακρα η μινωική 

τοιχογραφία της δύσης 
και σβήνει η πυρκαϊά στον αχερώνα της ακρογιαλιάς 
ανηφορίζουν ως εδώ οι γριές απ’ τα σκαμμένα στο 

βράχο σκαλοπάτια 
κάθουνται στη Μεγάλη Πέτρα γνέθοντας με τα μάτια τη 

θάλασσα κάθουνται και μετράν τ' αστέρια ως να 
μετράνε τα προγονικά ασημένια τους κουταλοπήρουνα 
κι αργά κατηφοράνε να ταΐσουνε τα εγγόνια τους με το 

μεσολογγιτικο μπαρούτι. 
Ναι, αλήθεια, ο Ελκόμενος έχει δυο χέρια τόσο λυπημένα 

μέσα στη θηλειά τους 
όμως το φρύδι του σαλεύει σαν το βράχο που όλο πάει να 

ξεκόλλησει πάνου απ’ το πικρό του μάτι. 
Από βαθιά ανεβαίνει αυτό το κύμα που δεν ξέρει 

παρακάλια από ψηλά κυλάει αυτός ο αγέρας με ρετσίνι 
φλέβα και πλεμόνι αλισφακιά. 

Αχ, θα φυσήξει μια να πάρει σβάρνα τις πορτοκαλιές 
της θύμησης Αχ, θα φυσήξει δυο να βγάλει σπίθα η 

σιδερένια πέτρα σαν καψούλι 
Αχ, θα φυσήξει τρεις και θα τρελλάνει τα ελατόδασα στη 
Λιάκουρα θα δώσει μια με τη γροθιά του να τινάξει την 

τυραγνία στον αγέρα 
και θα τραβήξει της αρκούδας νύχτας το χαλκά να μας 

χορέψει τσάμικο καταμεσίς στην τάπια 
και ντέφι το φεγγάρι θα χτυπάει που να γεμίσουν τα 

νησιώτικα μπαλκόνια αγουροξυπνημένο παιδολόι και 
σουλιώτισσες μανάδες. Ένας μαντατοφόρος φτάνει απ’ 

τη Μεγάλη Λαγκαδιά κάθε 
πρωινό στο πρόσωπο του λάμπει ο ιδρωμένος ήλιος  

κάτου από τη μασκάλη του κρατεί σφιχτά τη ρωμιοσύνη 
όπως κρατάει ο εργάτης την τραγιάσκα του μέσα στην 
εκκλησία. Ήρθε η ώρα, λέει. Νά μαστε έτοιμοι. Κάθε 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    227                            

 

  

remote, perhaps a little too close, as when you clasp a hand 
in the dark ness and say good evening with the bitter civility 
of the exile who returns to his ancestral home and not even 

his own kinfolk recognize him because he has known 
death,  

because he has known the life that comes before life and beyond 
death, but he recognizes them. He is not embittered. 

Tomorrow, he says. And he is certain  
that the longer road is the shortest road into the heart of 
God. And now the hour has come when the moon kisses 

him below the ear with some distress:  
the seaweed, the flowerpot, the footstool, and the stone 

staircase bid him good evening,  and the mountains and 
the seas and the cities and the sky 

bid him good evening,  and then at last, flicking his 
cigarette ash through the balcony 

railing, he may weep in his assurance,  
he may weep in the assurance of the trees and the stars and 

his brothers. 
 

REFORMATION 
This which you term serenity or discipline, kindness or 

apathy, this which you call a closed mouth with clenched 
teeth, showing the sweet silence of the mouth, hiding the 
clenched teeth, is only the metal's endurance under the 

useful hammer, under the dreadful hammer it is what you 
know;  

that from the formless you pass toward form. 

 
Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

ώρα είναι η δικιά μας ώρα. 
 

IV 
Τράβηξαν ολόισια στην αυγή με την ακαταδεξιά του 

ανθρώπου που πεινάει, μέσα στ’ ασάλευτα μάτια τους είχε 
πήξει ένα άστρο στον ώμο τους κουβάλαγαν το λαβωμένο 
καλοκαίρι. Από δω πέρασε ο στρατός με τα φλάμπουρα 
κατάσαρκα με το πείσμα δαγκωμένο στα δόντια τους 
σαν άγουρο γκόρτσι με τον άμμο του φεγγαριού μες 

στις αρβύλες τους  
και με την καρβουνόσκονη της νύχτας κολλημένη μέσα στα 

ρουθούνια και στ' αυτιά τους. 
Δέντρο το δέντρο, πέτρα-πέτρα πέρασαν τον κόσμο, μ' 

αγκάθια προσκεφάλι πέρασαν τον ύπνο. 
Φέρναν τη ζωή στα δυο στεγνά τους χέρια σαν ποτάμι. 
Σε κάθε βήμα κέρδιζαν μια οργιά ουρανό - για να τον 

δώσουν. Πάνου στα καραούλια πέτρωναν σαν τα 
καψαλιασμένα δέντρα, κι όταν χόρευαν στην πλατεία, 
μέσα στα σπίτια τρέμαν τα ταβάνια και κουδούνιζαν τα 

γυαλικά στα ράφια. 
Α, τι τραγούδι τράνταξε τα κορφοβούνια - 

ανάμεσα στα γόνατα τους κράταγαν το σκουτέλι του 
φεγγαριού και δειπνούσαν, και σπάγαν το αχ μέσα στα 
φυλλοκάρδια τους  σα νάσπαγαν μια ψείρα ανάμεσα στα 

δυο χοντρά τους νύχια. 
Ποιος θα σου φέρει τώρα το ζεστό καρβέλι μες στη νύχτα 
να ταΐσεις τα όνειρα; Ποιος θα σταθεί στον ίσκιο της 

ελιάς παρέα με το τζιτζίκι μη 
σωπάσει το.τζιτζίκι, τώρα που ασβέστης του μεσημεριού 

βάφει τη μάντρα ολόγυρα του ορίζοντα  
σβήνοντας τα μεγάλα αντρίκια ονόματα τους; 

Το χώμα τούτο που μοσκοβολούσε τα χαράματα 
το χώμα που είτανε δικό τους και δικό μας - αίμα τους πώς 
μύριζε το χώμα και τώρα πώς κλειδώσανέ την πόρτα τους 
τ’ αμπέλια μας πώς λίγνεψε το φως στις στέγες και στα 
δέντρα ποιος να το πει πως βρίσκονται οι μισοί κάτου απ’ 
το χώμα κ’ οι άλλοι μισοί στα σίδερα; Με τόσα φύλλα να 
σου γνέφει ο ήλιος καλημέρα με τόσα φλάμπουρα να 

λάμπει ο ουρανός και τούτοι μες στα σίδερα και κείνοι μες 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    228                            

 

  

στο χώμα. Σώπα, όπου νάναι θα σημάνουν οι καμπάνες. 
Αυτό το χώμα είναι δικό τους και δικό μας. Κάτου απ’ το 

χώμα, μες στα σταυρωμένα χέρια τους κρατάνε της 
καμπάνας το σκοινί - περμένουνε την ώρα, δεν 

κοιμούνται, περμένουν να σημάνουν την ανάσταση. Τούτο 
το χώμα είναι δικό τους και δικό μας - δε μπορεί κανείς να 

μας το πάρει. 
 

V 
Κάτσανε κάτου απ’ τις ελιές το απομεσήμερο 

κοσκινίζοντας το σταχτί φως με τα χοντρά τους δάχτυλα 
βγάλανε τις μπαλάσκες τους και λογάριαζαν πόσος 
μόχτος χώρεσε στο μονοπάτι της νύχτας πόση πίκρα 
στον κόμπο της αγριομολόχας πόσο κουράγιο μες στα 
μάπα του ξυπόλυτου παιδιού που κράταε τη σημαία. 

Είχε απομείνει πάρωρα στον κάμπο το στερνό χελιδόνι 
ζυγιαζόταν στον αέρα σα μια μαύρη λουρίδα στο μανίκι 
του φθινοπώρου. Τιποτ’ άλλο δεν έμενε. Μονάχα 

κάπνιζαν ακόμα τα καμένα σπίτια. 
Οι άλλοι μας άφησαν από καιρό κάτου απ' τις πέτρες με 

το σκισμένο τους πουκάμισο και με τον όρκο τους 
γραμμένο στην πεσμένη πόρτα. 

Δεν έκλαψε κανείς. Δεν είχαμε καιρό. Μόνο που η σιγαλιά 
μεγάλωνε πολύ κ' είταν το φως συγυρισμένο κάτου στο 

γιαλό σαν το νοικοκυριό της σκοτωμένης. 
Τι θα γίνουν τώρα όταν θάρθει η βροχή μες στο χώμα 
με τα σάπια πλατανόφυλλα τι θα γίνουν όταν ο ήλιος 

στεγνώσει στο χράμι της συννεφιάς 
σα σπασμένος κοριός στο χωριάτικο κρεββάτι           
όταν σταθεί στην καμινάδα του απόβραδου 

μπαλσαμωμένο το λελέκι του χιονιού; Ρίχνουνε αλάτι οι 
γριές μανάδες στη φωτιά, ρίχνουνε χώμα τα μαλλιά τους 
ξερρίζωσαν τ' αμπέλια της Μονοβασιάς μη και γλυκάνει 

μαύρη ρώγα των εχτρών το στόμα, βαλαν σ' ένα 
σακκούλι των παππούδων τους τα κόκκαλα μαζί με τα 
μαχαιροπήρουνα και τριγυρνάνε έξω απ’ τα τείχη της 
πατρίδας τους  ψάχνοντας τόπο να ριζώσουνε στη 

νύχτα. Θάναι δύσκολο τώρα να βρούμε μια γλώσσα πιο 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    229                            

 

  

της κερασιάς, λιγότερο δυνατή, λιγότερο πέτρινη τα 
χέρια εκείνα που απόμειναν στα χωράφια ή απάνου 

στα βουνά ή κάτου απ’ τη θάλασσα, δεν ξεχνάνε  θάναι 
δύσκολο να ξεχάσουμε τα χέρια τους Θάναι δύσκολο τα 
χέρια πούβγαλαν κάλους στη σκανδάλη να ρωτήσουν 
μια μαργαρίτα να πουν ευχαριστώ πόνου στο γόνατο 

τους, πάνου στο βιβλίο ή μες στο μπούστο της 
αστροφεγγιάς. θα χρειαστεί καιρός. Και πρέπει να 

μιλήσουμε. Ώσπου να βρουν το ψωμί και το δίκιο τους. 
Δυο κουπιά καρφωμένα στον άμμο τα χαράματα με τη 

φουρτούνα. Πούναι η βάρκα; 
Ένα αλέτρι μπηγμένο στο χώμα, κι ο αγέρας να φυσάει. 

Καμένο το χώμα. Πούναι ο ζευγολατης; 
Στάχτη η ελιά, τ' αμπέλι και το σπίτι. 

Βραδιά σπαγγοραμμένη με τ’ αστέρια της μες στο 
τσουράπι. Δάφνη ξερή και ρίγανη στο μεσοντούλαπο του 

τοίχου. Δεν τ’ άγγιξε η φωτιά. Καπνισμένο τσουκάλι στο τζάκι - 
και να κοχλάζει μόνο το νερό στο κλειδωμένο σπίτι. Δεν 

πρόφτασαν να φάνε. 
Απάνω στο καμένο τους πορτόφυλλο οι φλέβες του δάσους - 

τρέχει το αίμα μες στις φλέβες. 
Και να το βήμα γνώριμο. Ποιος είναι; 

Γνώριμο βήμα με τις πρόκες στον ανήφορο. 
Το σύρσιμο της ρίζας μες στην πέτρα. Κάποιος έρχεται. 
Το σύνθημα, το παρασύνθημα. Αδελφός. Καλησπέρα. 

θα βρει λοιπόν το φως τα δέντρα του, θα βρει μια μέρα και το 
δέντρο τον καρπό του. Του σκοτωμένου το παγούρι έχει νερό 

και φως ακόμα. 
Καλησπέρα, αδερφέ μου. Το ξέρεις. Καλησπέρα. 

Στην ξύλινη παράγκα της πουλάει μπαχαρικά και ντεμισέδες η 
γριά δύση. Κανείς δεν αγοράζει. Τράβηξαν ψηλά. 

Δύσκολο πια να χαμηλώσουν. Δύσκολο και να πουν το 
μπόι τους. 

Μέσα στ’ αλώνι όπου δεπνήσαν μια νυχτιά τα παλληκάρια 
μένουνε τα λιοκούκουτσα και το αίμα το ξερό του φεγγαριού κι 
ο δεκαπεντασύλλαβος απ’ τ’ άρματα τους. Την άλλη μέρα τα 
σπουργίτια φάγανε τα ψίχουλα της κουραμάνας τους, τα 

παιδιά φτιάξανε παιχνίδια με τα σπίρτα τους που άναψαν τα 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    230                            

 

  

τσιγάρα τους και τ’ αγκάθια των άστρων. Κ’ η πέτρα όπου 
καθήσαν κάτου απ' τις ελιές το απομεσήμερο αντίκρυ στη 
θάλασσα  αύριο θα γίνει ασβέστης στο καμίνι μεθαύριο θ1 

ασβεστώσουμε τα σπίτια μας και το πεζούλι της Αγιά-Σωτήρας 
αντιμεθαύριο θα φυτέψουμε το σπόρο εκεί που 

αποκοιμήθηκαν  κ’ ένα μπουμπούκι της ροδιάς θα σκάσει 
πρώτο γέλιο του μωρού στον κόρφο της λιακάδας. Κ’ ύστερα 
πια θα κάτσουμε στην πέτρα να διαβάσουμε όλη την  καρδιά 
τους σα να διαβάζουμε πρώτη φορά την ιστορία του κόσμου. 

 

VI 
Έτσι με τον ήλιο κατάστηθα στο πέλαγο που 
ασβεστώνει την αντικρυνή πλαγιά της μέρας 

λογαριάζεται διπλά και τρίδιπλα το μαντάλωμα και το 
βάσανο της δίψας λογαριάζεται  απ’ την αρχή η παλιά 
λαβωματιά κ’ η καρδιά ξεροψήνεται στην κάψα σαν τα 
βατικιώτικα κρεμμύδια μπρος στις πόρτες. Όσο πάνε τα 
χέρια τους μοιάζουνε πιότερο το χώμα όσο πάνε τα 

μάτια τους μοιάζουνε πιότερο, τον ουρανό. Αδειασε το 
κιούπι με το λάδι. Λίγη μούργα στον πάτο. Κι ο ψόφιος 

ποντικός.  
Άδειασε το κουράγιο της μάνας μαζί με το πήλινο κανάτι 

και τη στέρνα. Στυφίζουν τα ούλα της ερμιάς απ’ το 
μπαρούτι. Πού λάδι τώρα πια για το καντήλι της Αγιά-

Βαρβάρας  πού δυόσμος πια να λιβανίσει το 
μαλαματένιο κονίαμα του δειλινού  

πού μια μπουκιά ψωμί για τη βραδιά-ζητιάνα να σου 
παίξει την αστπομαντινάδας της στη λύρα. 

Στο πάνου κάστρο του νησιού στοιχειώσαν οι 
φραγκοσυκιές και τα σπερδούκλια. Το χώμα 

ανασκαμμένο από το κανονίδι και τους τάφους.  
Το γκρεμισμένο Διοικητήριο μπαλωμένο με ουρανό. Δεν 
έχει πια καθόλου τόπο για άλλους νεκρούς. Δεν έχα 

τόπο η λύπη να σταθεί να πλέξει 
τα μαλλιά της. Σπίτια καμένα που αγναντεύουν με 

βγαλμένα μάτια το μαρμαρωμένο πέλαγο κ’ οι σφαίρες 
σφηνωμένες στα τειχιά σαν τα μαχαίρια στα παίδια του 
Αγιου που τον δέσανε στο κυπαρίσσι. Όλη τη μέρα οι 
σκοτωμένοι λιάζονται ανάσκελα στον ήλιο. Και μόνο σα 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    231                            

 

  

βραδιάζει οι στρατιώτες σέρνονται με την κοιλιά στις 
καπνισμένες πέτρες ψάχνουν με τα ρουθούνια τον 

αγέρα έξω απ" το θάνατο ψάχνουνε τα παπούτσια του 
φεγγαριού μασουλώντας ένα κομμάτι 

μεντζεσόλα χτυπάν με τη γροθιά το βράχο μήπως τρέξει 
ο κόμπος του νερού μα απ’ την άλλη μεριά ο τοίχος 

είναι κούφιος και ξανακούν το χτύπημα με τους πολλούς 
γύρους που κάνει η οβίδα πέφτοντας στη θάλασσα κι 
ακούν ακόμα μια φορά το σκούξιμο των λαβωμένων 

μπρος στην πύλη.  
Πού να τραβήξεις; Σε φωνάζει ο αδερφός σου. 

Χτισμένη η νύχτα ολόγυρα απ’ τους ίσκιους ξένων 
καραβιών. Κλεισμένοι οι δρόμοι απ’ τα ντουβάρια. 

Μόνο για τα ψηλά είναι ακόμα δρόμος. 
Κι αυτοί μουντζώνουν τα καράβια και δαγκώνουνε τη 

γλώσσα τους ν’ ακούσουνε τον πόνο τους που δεν έγινε 
κόκκαλο. Απάνω στα μεντένια οι σκοτωμένοι καπετάνιοι 

ορθοί φρουρούν 
το κάστρο. Κάτου απ’ τα ρούχα τους λυώνουν τα κρέατα 
τους. Ει, αδέρφι, δεν απόστασες; Μπουμπούκιασε το 

βόλι μέσα στην καρδιά σου  
πέντε ζουμπούλια ξεμυτίσαν στη μασκάλη του 

ξερόβραχου, ανάσα ανάσα η μοσκοβολιά λέει το 
παραμύθι δε θυμάσαι; Δοντιά δοντιά η λαβωματιά σου 
λέει τη ζωή, το χαμομήλι φυτρωμένο μες στη λίγδα του 
νυχιού σου στο μεγάλο δάχτυλο του ποδαριού σου λέει την 

ομορφιά του κόσμου. 
Πιάνεις το χέρι. Είναι δικό σου. Νοτισμένο απ’ την αρμύρα. 
Δικιά σου η θάλασσα. Σαν ξερριζώνεις τρίχα απ’ το κεφάλι της 

σιωπής στάζει πικρό το γάλα της συκιάς.                     
Όπου και νάσαι ο ουρανός σε βλέπει. Στρίβει στα δάχτυλα του 

ο αποσπερίτης την ψυχή σου σαν τσιγάρο έτσι ναν τη 
φουμάρεις την ψυχή σου ανάσκελα  

βρέχοντας το ζερβί σου χέρι μες στην ξαστεριά  
και στο δεξί σου κολλημένο το ντουφέκι αρραβωνιαστικιά σου 
να θυμηθείς πως ο ουρανός ποτέ του δε σε ξέχασε όταν θα 

βγάζεις απ’ τη μέσα τσέπη το παλιό του γράμμα και 
ξεδιπλώνοντας με δάχτυλα καμένα το φεγγάρι θα διαβάζεις  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    232                            

 

  

λεβεντιά και δόξα. 
Ύστερα θ' ανεβείς στο ψηλό καραούλι του νησιού σου 

και βάζοντας καψούλι το άστρο θα τραβήξεις μια στον αέρα 
πόνου από τα τειχιά και τα κατάρτια πάνου από τα βουνά που 

σκύβουν σα φαντάροι πληγωμένοι 
έτσι μόνο και μόνο να χουγιάξεις τα στοιχειά και να 

τρυπώσουν στην κουβέρτα του ίσκιου θα ρίξεις μιαν ίσα στον 
κόρφο τ’ ουρανού να βρείς το γαλανό σημάδι 

σάμπως να βρίσκεις πάνου απ' το πουκάμισο τη ρώγα της γυ-
ναίκας  που αύριο θα βυζαίνει το παιδί σου 

σάμπως να βρίσκεις ύστερ’ από χρόνια το χερούλι της 
εξώπορτας του πατρικού σπιτιού σου. 

 
VII 

Το σπίτι, ο δρόμος, η φραγκοσυκιά, τα φλούδια του 
ήλιου στην αυλή που τα τσιμπολογάν οι κόττες. Τα 

ξέρουμε, μας ξέρουνε. Δω χάμου ανάμεσα στα βάτα έχει 
η δεντρογαλιά παρατημένο το κίτρινο πουκάμισο της. 
Δω χάμου είναι η καλύβα του μερμηγκιού κι ο πύργος 
της σφήγκας με τις πολλές πολεμίστρες, στην ίδια ελιά το 
τσόφλι του περσινού τζίτζικα κ' η φωνή του φετεινού τζίτζικα, 
στα σκοίνα ο ίσκιος σου που σε παίρνει από πίσω σα σκυλί 

αμίλητο, πολύ βασανισμένο, 
πιστό σκυλί - τα μεσημέρια κάθεται δίπλα στο χωματένιον 

ύπνο σου μυρίζοντας τις  πικροδάφνες 
τα βράδια κουλουριάζεται στα πόδια σου κοιτάζοντας 
ένα άστρο. Είναι μια σιγαλιά από αχλάδια που μεγαλώνουνε 

στα σκέλια του καλοκαιριού 
μια νύστα από νερό που χαζεύει στις ρίζες της χαρουπιάς η 
άνοιξη έχει τρία ορφανά κοιμισμένα στην ποδιά της 
έναν αϊτό μισοπεθαμένο στα μάτια της και κει ψηλά 
πίσω από το πευκόδασο στεγνώνει το ξωκκλήσι του Αη-

Γαννιού του Νηστευτή 
σαν άσπρη κουτσουλιά του σπουργιτιού σ’ ένα πλατύ φύλλο 
μουριάς που την ξεραίνει η κάψα. Ετούτος ο τσοπάνος 

τυλιγμένος την προβιά του έχει σε κάθε τρίχα του κορμιού 
ένα στεγνό ποτάμι έχει ένα δάσος βελανιδιές σε κάθε 

τρύπα της φλογέρας του και το  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    233                            

 

  

ραβδί του έχει τους ίδιους ρόζους με το κουπί που 
πρωτοχτύπησε το γαλάζιο του Ελλήσποντου. 
Δε χρειάζεται να θυμηθείς. Η φλέβα του πλάτανου 

 εχει το αίμα σου. Και το σπερδούκλι του νησιού κ’ η 
κάπαρη. Το αμίλητο πηγάδι ανεβάζει στο καταμεσήμερο 
μία στρογγυλή φωνή από μαύρο γυαλί κι από άσπρο 

άνεμο στρογγυλή σαν τα παλιά πιθάρια η ίδια 
πανάρχαιη φωνή. Κάθε νύχτα το φεγγάρι 

αναποδογυρίζει τους σκοτωμένους  
ψάχνει τα πρόσωπα τους με παγωμένα δάχτυλα να βρεί 
το γιο του απ’ την κοψιά του σαγονιού κι απ’ τα πέτρινα 
φρύδια, ψάχνει τις τσέπες τους. Πάντα κάτι θα βρεί. 
Κάτι βρίσκουμε. Ένα κλειδί, ένα γράμμα, ένα ρολόι 

σταματημένο στις εφτά.  
Κουρντίζουμε πάλι το ρολόι. Περπατάνε οι ώρες. 

Όταν μεθαύριο λυώσουνε τα ρούχα τους και μείνουνε 
γυμνοί ανάμεσα στα στρατιωτικά κουμπιά τους έτσι που 
μένουν τα κομμάτια τ' ουρανού ανάμεσα από τα καλο-
καιριάτικα άστρα τότε μπορεί να βρούμε τ' όνομα τους 
και μπορεί να το φωνάξουμε: αγαπώ. Τότε. Μα πάλι 
αυτά τα πράγματα είναι λιγάκι σαν πολύ μακρινά. 

Είναι λιγάκι σαν πολύ κοντινά, σαν όταν πιάνεις στο 
σκοτάδι ένα χέρι και λες καλησπέρα με την πικρή 

καλογνωμιά του ξενητεμένου όταν γυρνάει στο πατρικό 
του και δεν τον γνωρίζουνε μήτε οι δικοί του, γιατί αυτός 

έχει γνωρίσει το θάνατο 
κ’ έχει γνωρίσει τη ζωή πριν απ' τη ζωή και πάνου από 
το θάνατο και τους γνωρίζει. Δεν πικραίνεται. Αύριο, 
λέει. Κ' είναι σίγουρος πως ο δρόμος ο πιο μακρινός 

είναι ο πιο κοντινός στην καρδιά του Θεού. Και την ώρα 
που το φεγγάρι τον φιλάει στο λαιμό με κάποια 

στεναχώρια, τινάζοντας τη στάχτη του τσιγάρου του απ’ 
τα κάγκελα του μπαλκονιού, μπορεί να κλάψει από τη 
σιγουριά του μπορεί να κλάψει από τη σιγουριά των 

δέντρων και των άστρων και των αδελφών του. 

 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    234                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Moonlight sonata 

(1956) 

 

Η σονάτα του Σεληνόφωτος 

(1956) 
 

A spring evening. A large room in an old house. A woman of a 
certain age, dressed in black, is speaking to a young man. 

They have not turned on the lights. Through both windows 
the moonlight shines relentlessly. Ϊ forgot to mention that the 
Woman in Black has published two or three interesting volume of 
poetry with a religious flavor. So, the Woman in Black is speaking 

to the Young Man: 
 

Let me come with you. What a moon there is tonight! 
The moon is kind - it won't show that my hair turned white. The 

moon will turn my hair to gold again. You wouldn't 
understand. Let me come with you. 

When there's a moon the shadows in the house grow larger, 
invisible hands draw the curtains, 

a ghostly finger writes forgotten words in the dust 
on the piano I don't want to hear them. Hush. Let me come with 
you a little farther down, as far as the brickyard wall, to the 
point where the road turns and the city appears concrete and 

airy, whitewashed with moonlight, 
so indifferent and insubstantial so positive, like metaphysics, 
that finally you can believe you exist and do not exist, that 

you never existed, that time with its destruction never 
existed. Let me come with you. 

We'll sit for a little on the low wall, up on the hill, 
and as the spring breeze blows around us 

perhaps we'll even imagine that we are flying, 
because, often, and now especially, I hear the sound of my 

own dress like the sound of two powerful wings opening and 
closing, you feel the tight mesh of your throat, your ribs, 

your flesh, and when you enclose yourself within the sound 
of that flight 

you feel the tight mesh of your throat, your birds, your 

 

Ανοιξιάτικο βράδι. Μεγάλο δωμάτιο παλιού σπιτιού. 
Μια ηλικιωμένη γυναίκα, ντυμένη στα μαύρα, μιλάει σ’ 
έναν νέο. Δεν έχουν ανάψει φως. Απ’ τα δυο παράθυρα 
μπαίνει ένα αμείλικτο φεγγαρόφωτο. Ξέχασα να πω ότι η 

Γυναίκα με τα Μαύρα έχα εκδώσει δυο-τρεις 
ενδιαφέρουσες ποιητικές συλλογές θρησκευτικής πνοής. 

Λοιπόν, η Γυναίκα μετά Μαύρα μιλάει στον Νέο: 
 

Άφησε μενάρθω μαζί σου. Τι φεγγάρι απόψε! Είναι καλό το 
φεγγάρι δε θα φαίνεται που άσπρισαν τα μαλλιά μου. Το 
φεγγάρι θα καν ει πάλι χρυσά τα μαλλιά μου. Δε θα 

καταλάβεις. Άφησε με νάρθω μαζί σου. Όταν έχει φεγγάρι 
μεγαλώνουν οι σκιές μες στο σπίτι, αόρατα χέρια 
τραβούν τις κουρτίνες, ένα δάχτυλο αχνό γράφει στη 
σκόνη του πιάνου λησμονησμένα λόγια-δε θέλω να τ’ 

ακούσω. Σώπα. 
Άφησε με νάρθω μαζί σου λίγο πιο κατου. ως τη μάντρα 
του τουβλάδικου, ως εκεί που στρίβει ο δρόμος και 

φαίνεται η πολιτεία τσιμεντένια κι αέρινη, ασβεστωμένη 
με φεγγαρόφωτο. 

τόσο αδιάφορη κι άϋλη τόσο θετική σαν μεταφυσική που 
μπορείς επιτέλους να πιστέψεις πως υπάρχεις και δεν 

υπάρχεις πως ποτέ δεν υπήρξες, δεν υπήρξε ο χρόνος κ’ 
η φθορά του. Άφησε με νάρθω μαζί σου. Θα καθίσουμε 

λίγο στο πεζούλι, πάνω στο ύψωμα, κι όπως θα μας 
φυσάει ο ανοιξιάτικος αέρας μπορεί να φανταστούμε 
κιόλας πως θα πετάξουμε, γιατί, πολλές φορές, και τώρα 

ακόμη, ακούω το θόρυβο του φουστανιού μου 
σον το θόρυβο δυο δυνατών φτερών που ανοιγοκλείνουν, κι 

όταν κλείνεσαι μέσα σ’ αυτόν τον ήχο του πετάγματος 
νιώθεις κρουστό το λαιμό σου, τα πλευρά σου, τη σάρκα 
σου, κ’ έτσι σφιγμένος μες στους μυώνες του γαλάζιου 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    235                            

 

  

flesh,and thus constricted amid the muscles of the azure air, 
amid the strong nerves of the heavens, 

it makes no difference whether you go or return 
it makes no difference whether you go or return 

and it makes no difference that my hair has turned white 
(that is not my sorrow - my sorrow is that my heart too does not 

turn white). Let me come with you. 
I know that each one of us travels to love alone, 

alone to faith and to death. I know it. I've tried it. It doesn't 
help. Let me come with you. This house is haunted, it preys on 
me what I mean is, it has aged a great deal, the nails are 

working loose, the portraits drop as though plunging into the 
void, the plaster falls without a sound as the dead man's hat 

falls from the peg in the dark hallway as the worn woolen glove 
falls from the knee of silence or as moonbeam falls on the 
old, gutted armchair. Once it too was new not the photograph 
that you are starting at so dubiously I mean the armchair, very 

comfortable, you could sit in it for hours 
with your eyes closed and dream whatever came into your 
head a sandy beach, smooth, wet, shining in the moonlight, 

shining more than my old patent leather shoes that I send each 
month to the shoeshine shop on the 

corner, or a fishing boat's sail that sinks to the bottom rocked 
by its own breathing, a three-cornered sail like a 

handkerchief folded slantwise in half only 
as though it had nothing to shut up or hold fast 

no reason to flutter open in farewell. I have always has a 
passion for handkerchiefs, not to keep anything tied in them, 

no flower seeds or camomile gathered in the fields at 
sunset, nor to tie them with four knots like the caps the 

workers wear on the construction site across the street, nor to 
dab my eyes I've kept my eyesight good; 

I've never worn glasses. A harmless idiosyncracy, 
handkerchiefs. Now I fold them in quarters, in eighths, in 

sixteenths to keep my fingers occupied. And now I 
remember that this is how I counted the music when I went 
to the Odeion with a blue pinafore and a white collar, with 
two blond braids hand in hand with a small friend of mine, 

αγέρα, μέσα στα ρωμαλέα νεύρα του ύψους, δεν έχει 
σημασία αν φεύγεις ή αν γυρίζεις κι ούτε έχει σημασία που 
άσπρισαν τα μαλλιά μου, (δεν είναι τούτο η λύπη μου - η 
λύπη μου είναι που δεν ασπρίζει κ’ η καρδιά μου). Άφησε με 

νάρθω μαζί σου. Το ξέρω πως καθένας μονάχος 
πορεύεται στον έρωτα, μονάχος στη δόξα και στο 

θάνατο. Το ξέρω. Το δοκίμασα. Δεν ωφελεί. Αφησε με 
νάρθω μαζί σου. Τούτο το σπίτι στοίχειωσε, με διώχνει 
θέλω να πω έχει παλιώσει πολύ, τα καρφιά ξεκολλάνε, τα 
κάδρα ρίχνονται σα να βουτάνε στο κενό, οι σουβάδες 

πέφτουν αθόρυβα όπως πέφτει το καπέλο το υ 
πεθαμένου απ' την κρεμάστρα στο σκοτεινό 

διάδρομο όπως πέφτει το μάλλινο τριμμένο γάντι της 
σιωπής απ' τα γόνατα της ή όπως πέφτει μια λουρίδα 

φεγγάρι στην παλιά, ξεκοιλιασμένη πολυθρόνα. 
Κάποτε υπήρξε νέα κι αυτή, όχι η φωτογραφία που 

κοιτάς με τοση δυσπιστία λέω για την πολυθρόνα, πολύ 
αναπαυτική, μπορούσες ώρες ολόκληρες να 

Κάθεσαι και με κλεισμένα μάτια να ονειρεύεσαι ό,τι τύχει 
μιαν αμμουδιά στρωτή, νοτισμένη, στιλβωμένη από 

φεγγάρι, πιο στιλβωμένη απ' τα παλιά λουστρίνια μου που 
κάθε μήνα τα δίνω 

στο στιλβωτήριο της γωνίας, ή ένα πανί ψαρόβαρκας 
που χάνεται στο βάθος λικνισμένο απ’ την ίδια του 

ανάσα, τριγωνικό παν ίσα μαντίλι διπλωμένο λοξά μόνο 
στα δυο σανά μην είχε τίποτα να κλείσε- ή να κρατήσει ή ν' 
ανεμίσει διάπλατο σε αποχαιρετισμό. Πάντα μου είχα 

μανία μετά 
μαντίλια, όχι για να κρατήσω τίποτα δεμένο, 

τίποτα σπόρους λουλουδιών ή χαμομήλι μαζεμένο 
στους αγρούς με το λιόγερμα ή να το δέσω τέσσερις 
κόμπους σαν το σκουφί που φοράνε οι εργάτες 
στ’ αντικρυνό γιαπί ή να σκουπίζω τα μάτια μου,- 

διατήρησα καλή την όραση μου ποτέ μου δε φόρεσα 
γυαλιά. Μια απλή ιδιοτροπία τα μαντίλια. Τώρα τα διπλώνω 

στα τέσσερα, στα οχτώ, στ α δεκάξη 
Ν’ απασχολώ τα δάχτυλα μου. Και τώρα θυμήθηκα 

πως έτσι μετρούσα τη μουσική σαν πήγαινα στο Ωδείο 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    236                            

 

  

peachy, all light and picked flowers, (forgive me such 
digressions - a bad habit) and my family rested great hopes on 

my musical talent. But I was telling you about the armchair  
gutted the rusted springs are showing, the stuffing I thought of 

sending it next door to the furniture shop, but where's the time 
and the money and the inclination what to fix first? 

I thought of throwing a sheet over it I was afraid 
of a white sheet in so much moonlight. People sat here 

who dreamed great dreams, as you do and I too. 
and now they rest under earth untroubled by rain or the 

moon. Let me come with you. We'll pause for a little at the top of 
St. Nicholas' marble steps, 

and afterward you'll descend and I will turn back, 
having on my left side the warmth from a casual touch of 

your jacket and some squares of light, too, from small 
neighborhood windows and this pure white mist from the moon, 

like a great procession of silver swans - 
and I do not fear this manifestation, for at another time 

on many spring evenings I talked with God who appeared to 
me clothed in the haze and glory of such a moonlight and many 
young men, more handsome even than you, I sacrificed to 

him I dissolved, so white, so unapproachable, amid my 
white flame, in the whiteness of moonlight, burnt up by men's 

vocarious eyes and the tentative rapture of youths, 
besieged by splendid bronzed bodies, 

strong limbs exercising at the pool, with oars, on the track, at 
soccer (I pretended not to see them), 

foreheads, lips and throats, knees, fingers and eyes, 
chests and arms and things (and truly I did not see them) - 
you know, sometimes, when you're entranced, you forget 

what entranced you, the enhancement 
alone is enough my God, what star bright eyes, and I was 

lifted up to an apotheosis of disavowed stars 
because, besieged thus from without and from within, 

no other road was left me save only the way up or the way 
down. No, it is not enough. Let me come with you. 

I know it's very late. Let me, because for so many years - 
days, nights, and crimson noons - I've stayed alone, 

με μπλε ποδιά κι άσπρο γιακά, με δυο ξανθές πλεξούδες  
κρατημένη απ' το χέρι μιας μικρής φίλης μου ροδακινιάς 

όλο φως και 
ροζ λουλούδια, (συχώρεσε μου αυτά τα λόγια- κακή 

συνήθεια) κ’ οιδικοί μου στήριζαν 
μεγάλες ελπίδες στο μουσικό μου τάλαντο. Λοιπόν, σου 
λεγα για την πολυθρόνα ξεκοιλιασμένη φαίνονται οι 

σκουριασμένες σούστες, τα άχερα 
έλεγα να την πάω δίπλα στο επιπλοποιείο, μα που καιρός 
και λεφτά και διάθεση τι να πρωτοδιορθώσεις; έλεγα να 
ρίξω ένα σεντόνι πάνω της, φοβήθηκα τ’ άσπρο σεντόνι σε 

τέτοιο φεγγαρόφωτο. Εδώ κάθησαν άνθρωποι που 
ονειρεύτηκαν μεγάλα όνειρα, όπως κ’ εσύ κι όπως κ’ εγώ 

άλλωστε, και τώρα ξεκουράζονται κάτω απ’ το χώμα δίχως 
να ενοχλούνται απ’ τη βροχή ή το φεγγάρι. Άφησέ με 

ναρθω μαζί σού. 
Θα σταθούμε λιγάκι στην κορφή της μαρμάρινης 

σκάλας του Αη-Νικόλα, ύστερα εσύ θα κατηφορίσεις κ’ 
εγώ θα γυρίσω πίσω έχοντας στ' αριστερό πλευρό μου τη 
ζέστα απ’ το τυχαίο άγγιγμα του σακκακιού σου κι ακόμη 
μερικά τετράγωνα φώτα από μικρά συνοικιακά παράθυρα 
κι αυτή την πάλλευκη άχνα απ' το φεγγάρι πουν αι σα 

μια μεγάλη συνοδεία ασημένιων κύκνων 
και δε φοβάμαι αυτή την έκφραση, γιατί εγώ 

πολλές ανοιξιάτικες νύχτες συνομίλησα άλλοτε με το Θεό 
που μου εμφανίστηκε ντυμένος την αχλύ και τη δόξα ενός 

τέτοιου σεληνόφωτος, 
και πολλούς νέους, πιο ωραίους κι από σένα ακόμη, του 
εθυσίασα, έτσι λευκή κι απρόσιτη ν' ατμίζομαι μες στη 
λευκή μου φλόγα, στη λευκότητα του σεληνόφωτος, 
πυρπολημένη απ’ τ’ αδηφάγα μάτια των αντρών κι απ' τη 
δισταχτικήν έκσταση των εφήβων, πολιορκημένη από 
εξαίσια, ηλιοκαμένα σώματα, όλκιμα μέλη γυμνασμένα 
στο κολύμπι, στο κουπί, στο στίβο, στο ποδόσφαιρο 
(που έκανα πως δεν τα βλεπα) μέτωπα, χείλη και λαιμοί, 

γόνατα, δάχτυλα και μάτια, 
στέρνα και μπράτσα και μηροί (κι αλήθεια δεν ταβλεπα) 

- ξέρεις, καμμια φορά, θαυμάζοντας, ξεχνάς, ό,τι 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    237                            

 

  

unyielding, alone and immaculate, even in my marriage bed 
immaculate and alone, writing glorious verses to lay on the 
knees of God, verses that, I assure you, will endure as if 

chiselled in flawless marble 
beyond my life and your life, well beyond. It is not enough. 
Let me come with you. This house can't bear me anymore. I 

cannot endure to bear it on my back. 
You must always be careful, be careful, to hold up the wall 
with the large buffet to hold up the table with the chairs to 

hold up the chairs with your hands 
to place your shoulder under the hanging beam. And the 

piano, like a closed black coffin. You do not dare to open it. 
You have to be so careful, so careful, lest they fall, lest you 

fall. I cannot bear it. Let me come with you. This house, 
despite all its dead, has no intention of dying. It insists on 

living with its dead 
on living off its dead on living off the certainty of its death 

and on still keeping house for its dead, the rotting beds and 
shelves. Let me come with you. 

Here, however quietly I walk through the mist of evening, 
whether in slippers or barefoot, 

there will be some sound: a pane of glass cracks or a mirror, 
some steps are heard not my own. 

Outside, in the street, perhaps these steps are not heard - 
repentance, they say, wears wooden shoes  and if you look 

into this or that other mirror, behind the dust and the cracks, 
you discern darkened and more fragmented your face, your 
face, which all your life you sought only to keep clean and 
whole. The lip of the glass gleams in the moonlight like a 

round razor how can I lift it to my lips? however much I thirst  how 
can I lift it - Do you see? I am already in a mood for similes - 
this at least is left me, reassuring me still that my wits are 
not failing. Let me come with you. At times, when evening 
descends, I have the feeling that outside the window the 

bear-keeper is going by with his old heavy she-bear, her fur 
full of burns and thorns, stirring dust in the neighborhood 

street a desolate cloud of dust that censes the dusk, and the 
children have gone home for supper and aren't allowed 

θαυμάζεις, σου φτάνει ο θαυμασμός σου, θε μου, τι 
μάτια πάνάστρα, κι ανυψωνόμουν σε μιαν οποθέωση 

αρνημένων άστρων 
γιατί, έτσι πολιορκημένη απ’ έξω κι από μέσα, 

άλλος δρόμος δε μουμενε παρά μονάχα προς τα πάνω ή 
προς τα κάτω. Όχι, δε φτάνει. Άφησε με ναρθω μαζί σου. 
Το ξέρω η ώρα πια είναι περασμένη. Άφησε με, γιατί 
τόσα χρόνια, μέρες και νύχτες και πορφυρά μεσημέρια, 
έμεινα μόνη, ανένδοτη, μόνη και πάναγνη, ακόμη στη 
συζυγική μου κλίνη πάναγνη και μόνη, γράφοντας 

ένδοξους στίχους στα γόνατα του θεού, στίχους που, σε 
διαβεβαιώ, θα μείνουνε σα λαξευμένοι σε άμεμπτο 

μάρμαρο 
πέρα απ’ τη ζωή μου και τη ζωή σου, πέρα πολύ. Δε 

φτάνει. Άφησε με ναρθω μαζί σου. Τούτο το σπίτι δε με 
σηκώνει πια. Δεν αντέχω να το σηκώνω στη ράχη μου. 

Πρέπει πάντα να προσέχεις, να προσέχεις, να 
στεριώνεις τον τοίχο με το μεγάλο μπουφέ να στεριώνεις 
τον μπουφέ με το πανάρχαιο σκαλιστό τραπέζι να 

στεριώνεις το τραπέζι με τις καρέκλες να στεριώνεις τις 
καρέκλες με τα χέρια σου 

να βάζεις τον ώμο σου κάτω απ’ το δοκάρι που κρέμασε. Και 
το πιάνο, σα μαύρο φέρετρο κλεισμένο. Δεν τολμάς να τ’ 

ανοίξεις. 
Όλο να προσέχεις, να προσέχεις, μην πέσουν, μην 
πέσεις. Δεν αντέχω. Άφησε με ναρθώ μαζί σου. 

Τούτο το σπίτι, παρ’ όλους τους νεκρούς του, δεν εννοεί να 
πεθάνει. Επιμένει να ζει με τους νεκρούς του 

να ζει απ’ τους νεκρούς του να ζει απ’ τη βεβαιότητα του 
θανάτου του και να νοικοκυρεΰει ακόμη τους νεκρούς του σ' 

ετοιμόρροπα κρεββάτια 
και ραφία. Άφησε με ναρθω μαζί σου. 

Εδώ, όσο σιγά κι αν περπατήσω μες στην άχνα της 
βραδιάς, είτε με τις παντούφλες, είτε ξυπόλητη, 

κάτι θα τρίξει,- ένα τζάμι ραγίζει ή κάποιος καθρέφτης, 
κάποια βήματα ακούγονται, δεν είναι δικά μου. Έξω, στο 
δρόμο μπορεί να μην ακούγονται τούτα τα βήματα, η 
μεταμέλεια, λένε, φοράει ξυλοπάπουτσα, κι αν κάνεις να 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    238                            

 

  

outdoors again, 
even though behind the walls they divine the old bear's passing 
and the tired bear passes in the wisdom of her solitude, not 

knowing wherefore and why 
she's grown heavy, can no longer dance on her hind legs, 

can't wear her lace cap to amuse the children, the idlers, the 
importunate, and all she wants is to lie down on the ground 

letting them trample on her belly, playing thus her final 
game, showing her dreadful power for resignation, her 

indifference to the interest of others, to the rings in her lips, 
the compulsion of her teeth, 

her indifference to the interest of the others, to the rings in her 
lips, the compulsion of her teeth, her indifference to pain and 
to life with the sure complicity of death even a slow death her 

final indifference to death with the continuity and knowledge 
of life which transcends her enslavement with knowledge 

and with action. 
But who can play this game to the end? 

And the bear gets up again and moves on 
obedient to her leash, her rings, her teeth, 

smiling with torn lips at the pennies the beautiful and 
unsuspecting children toss (beautiful precisely because 

unsuspecting) and saying thank you. Because bears that 
have grown old can say only one thing: thank you; thank you. 

Let me come with you. This house stifles me. The kitchen 
especially is like the depths of the sea. The hanging 

coffeepots gleam like round, huge eyes of improbable fish, 
the plates undulate slowly like medusas, seaweed and shells 
catch in my hair - later I can't pull them loose I can't get back to 

the surface  
the tray falls silently from my hands I sink down 

and I see the bubbles from my breath rising, rising 
and I try to divert myself watching them 

and I wonder what someone would say who happened to be 
above and saw these bubbles, 

perhaps that someone was drowning or a diver exploring the 
depths? And in fact more than a few times I've discovered 

there, in the depths of drowning, 

κοιτάξεις σ’ αυτόν ή στον άλλον καθρέφτη, πίσω απ' τη 
σκόνη και τις ραγισματιές, διακρίνεις πιο θαμπό και πιο 

τεμαχισμένο το πρόσωπο σου, το πρόσωπο σου που άλλο 
δε ζήτησες στη ζωή παρά να το κρατήσεις 

καθάριο κι αδιαίρετο. Τα χείλη του ποτηριού γυαλίζουν 
στο φεγγαρόφωτο σον κυκλικό ξυράφι πως να το φέρω 

στα χείλη μου; όσο κι αν διψώ, πως να το φέρω;- 
Βλέπεις; έχω ακόμη διάθεση για παρομοιώσεις,- αυτό 

μου απόμεινε, 
αυτό με βεβαιώνει ακόμη πως δε λείπω. 

Άφησε με ναρθω μαζί σου. Φορές  φορές, την ώρα που 
βραδιάζει, έχω την αίσθηση πως έξω απ' τ α παράθυρα 
περνάει ο αρκουδιάρης με τη γριά βαρεία του αρκούδα 
με το μαλλί της όλο αγκάθια και τριβόλια σηκώνοντας 
σκόνη στο συνοικιακό δρόμο ένα ερημικό σύννεφο 

σκόνη που θυμιάζει το σούρουπο και τα παιδιά έχουν 
γυρίσει σπίτια τους για το δείπνο και δεν τ' αφήνουν 

πιάνα βγουν έξω 
μ' όλο που πίσω απ' τους τοίχους μαντεύουν το 
περπάτημα της γριάς αρκούδας  κ' η αρκούδα 

κουρασμένη πορεύεται μες στη σοφία της μοναξιάς της, μην 
ξέροντας για που και γιατί  έχει βαρύνει, δεν μπορεί πια να 

χορεύει στα πισινά της πόδια 
δεν μπορεί να φοράει τη δαντελένια σκουφίτσα της να 
διασκεδάζει τα παιδιά, τους αργόσχολους, τους 

απαιτητικούς, και το μόνο που θέλει είναι να πλαγιάσει 
στο χώμα αφήνοντας να την πατάνε στην κοιλιά, παίζοντας 

έτσι το τελευταίο παιχνίδι της, 
δείχνοντας την τρομερή της δύναμη για  αραίτηση, 

την ανυπακοή της στα συμφέροντα των άλλων, στους 
κρίκους των χειλιών της, στην ανάγκη των δοντιών της, 
την ανυπακοή της στον πόνο και στη ζωή με τη σίγουρη 
συμμαχία του θανάτου-έστω κ’ ενός αργού θανάτου την 
τελική της ανυπακοή στο θάνατο με τη συνέχεια και τη 

γνώση της 
ζωής που ανηφοράει με γνώση και με πράξη πάνω απ’ 
τη σκλαβιά της. Μα ποιος μπορεί να παίξει ως το τέλος 
αυτό το παιχνίδι; Κ’ η αρκούδα σηκώνεται πάλι και 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    239                            

 

  

coral and pearls and treasures of shipwrecked vessels, 
unexpected encounters, past, present, and yet to come, 

a confirmation almost of eternity, a certain respite, a certain 
smile of immortality, as they say, 

a happiness, an intoxication, inspiration even, 
coral and pearls and sapphires; 

only I don't know how to give them no, I do give them; 
only I don't know if they can take them - but still, I give them. Let 
me come with you. One moment while I get my jacket. The way 
this weather's so changeable, I must be careful. It's damp in 

the evening, and doesn't the moon 
seem to you, honestly, as if it intensifies the cold? 

Let me button your shirt how strong your chest is 
- how strong the moon the armchair, I mean - and whenever I lift 

the cup from the table 
a hole of silence is left underneath. I place my palm over it 

at once so as not to see through it -1 put the cup back in its 
place; and the moon's a hole in the skull of the world - don't look 
through it, it's a magnetic force that draws you - don't look, don't 

any of you look, 
listen to what I'm telling you you'll fall in. This giddiness, 
beautiful, ethereal you will fall in the moon's marble well, 

shadows stir and mute wings, mysterious voices don't you hear 
them? Deep, deep the fall, deep, deep the ascent, the airy 

statue enmeshed in its open wings, 
deep, deep the inexorable benevolence of the silence - 

trembling lights on the opposite shore, so that you sway in 
your own wave, the breathing of the ocean. Beautiful, 

ethereal this giddiness be careful, you'll fall. Don't look at me, 
for me my place is this wavering this splendid vertigo. And 
so every evening I have little headache, some dizzy spells. 
Often I slip out to the pharmacy across the street for a few 

aspirin, but at times I'm too tired and I stay here with my 
headache and listen to the hollow sound the pipes make in 

the walls, or drink some coffee, and, absentminded as 
usual, I forget and make two who'll drink the other? It's really 

funny, I leave it on the window-sill to cool or sometimes drink them 
both, looking out the window at the bright green globe of the 

πορεύεται υπακούοντας στο λουρί της, στους κρίκους 
της, στα δόντια της, χαμογελώντας με τα σκισμένα χείλη 
της στις πενταροδεκάρες που τις ρίχνουνε τα ωραία κι 

ανυποψίαστα παιδιά 
(ωραία ακριβώς γιατί είναι ανυποψίαστα) και λέγοντας 

ευχαριστώ. Γιατί οι αρκούδες που γεράσανε 
το μόνο που έμαθαν να λένε είναι: ευχαριστώ, ευχαριστώ. 
Άφησε με ναρθώ μαζί μου. Τούτο το σπίτι με πνίγει. 

Μάλιστα η κουζίνα είναι σαν το βυθό της θάλασσας. Τα 
μπρίκια κρεμασμένα γυαλίζουν 

σα στρογγυλά, μεγάλα μάτια απίθανων ψαριών, 
τα πιάτα σαλεύουν αργά σαν τις μέδουσες, 

φύκια κι όστρακα πιάνονται στα μαλλιά μου δεν μπορώ να 
τα ξεκολλήσω ύστερα, δεν μπορώ ν’ ανέβω πάλι στην 
επιφάνεια ο δίσκος μου πέφτει απ' τα χέρια άηχος, 

σωριάζομαι και βλέπω τις φυσαλίδες απ'την ανάσα μου 
ν’ ανεβαίνουν, ν’ ανεβαίνουν και προσπαθώ να 

διασκεδάσω κοιτάζοντας τες κι αναρωτιέμαι τι θα λέει αν 
κάποιος βρίσκεται από πάνω και βλέπει αυτές τις 

φυσαλίδες, 
τάχα πως πνίγεται κάποιος ή πως ένας δύτης ανιχνεύει 
τους βυθούς; Κι αλήθεια δεν είναι λίγες οι φορές που 

ανακαλύπτω εκεί, στο βάθος 
του πνιγμού, κοράλλια και μαργαριτάρια και θησαυρούς 
ναυαγισμένων πλοίων, απρόοπτες συναντήσεις, και 

χτεσινά και σημερινά και μελλούμενα, μιαν επαλήθευση 
σχεδόν αιωνιότητας, 

κάποιο ξανάσασμα, κάποιο χαμόγελο αθανασίας, όπως 
λένε, μιαν ευτυχία, μια μέθη, κ’  νθουσιασμόν ακόμη, 

κοράλλια και μαργαριτάρια και ζαφείρια μονάχα που δεν 
ξέρω να τα δώσω όχι, τα δίνω μονάχα που δεν ξέρω αν 
μπορούν να τα πάρουν πάντως εγώ τα δίνω. Άφησε με 
ναρθω μαζί σου. Μια στιγμή, να πάρω τη ζακέτα μου. 

Τούτο τον άστατο καιρό, όσο ναναι, πρέπει να 
φυλαγόμαστε. Έχει υγρασία τα βράδια, και το φεγγάρι δε 
σου φαίνεται, αλήθεια, πως επιτείνει την ψύχρα; Άσε να 
σου κουμπώσω το πουκάμισο τι δυνατό το στήθος σου,  τι 
δυνατό φεγγάρι, η πολυθρόνα, λέω κι όταν σηκώνω το 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    240                            

 

  

pharmacy 
that's like the green light of a silent train coming to take me away 
with my handkerchiefs, my run-down shoes, my black purse, 
my verses, but no suitcases - what would one do with them? 

Let my come with you. 
Oh, are you going? Goodnight. No, I won't come. 

Goodnight. I'll be going myself in a little. Thank you. Because, in 
the end, I must get out of this broken-down house. I must see a bit 

of the city - no, not the moon - 
the city with its calloused hands, the city of daily work, the 

city that swears by bread and by its fist, 
the city that bears all of us on its back 

with our pettiness, sins, and hatreds, our ambitions, our 
ignorance and our senility. I need to hear the great footsteps 
of the city, and no longer to hear your footsteps or God's, or 

my own. Goodnight. 
The room grows dark. It looks as though a cloud may have 
covered the moon. All at once, as if someone had turned up 
the radio in the nearby bar, a very familiar musical phrase 
can be heard. Then I realize that "The Moonlight Sonata", 

just the first movement, has been playing very softly through 
this entire scene. The Young Man will go down the hill now 
with an ironic and perhaps sympathetic smile on his finely 

chiselled lips and with a feeling of release. Just as he 
reaches St. Nicolas, before he goes down the marble steps, 
he will laugh - a loud, uncontrollable laugh. His laughter will 
not sound at all unseemly beneath the moon. Perhaps the 
only unseemly thing will be that nothing is unseemly. Soon 

the Young Man will fall silent, become serious, and say: 
"The decline of an era. " So, thoroughly calm once more, he 

will unbutton his shirt again and go on his way. As for the 
woman in black, I don't know whether she finally did get out 
of the house. The moon is shining again. And in the corners 
of the room the shadows intensify with an intolerable regret, 

almost fury, not so much for the life, as for the useless 
confession. Can you hear? The radio plays on: 

Translated by:  Peter Green & Beverly Bardsley   

φλιτζάνι 
απ’ το τραπέζι μένει από κάτω μια τρύπα σιωπή, βάζω 

αμέσως την παλάμη του επάνω 
να μην κοιτάξω μέσα,- αφήνω πάλι το φλιτζάνι στη θέση 
του και το φεγγάρι μια τρύπα στο κρανίο του κόσμου μην 
κοιτάζεις μέσα.είναι μια δύναμη μαγνητική που σε τραβάει 

μην κοιτάξεις, μην 
κοιτάχτε, ακούστε με που σας μιλάω θα πέσετε μέσα. 
Τούτος ο ίλιγγος ωραίος, ανάλαφρος θα πέσεις, ένα 

μαρμάρινο πηγάδι το φεγγάρι, 
ίσκιοι σαλεύουν και βουβά φτερά, μυστηριακές φωνές  δεν 

τις ακούτε; Βαθύ βαθύ το πέσιμο, 
βαθύ βαθύ το ανέβασμα, το αέρινο άγαλμα κρουστό μες 

στ’ ανοιχτά φτερά του, βαθειά βαθειά η αμείλικτη 
ευεργεσία της σιωπής, τρέμουσες φωταψίες της άλλης 
όχθης, όπως ταλαντεύεσαι μες στο ίδιο σου το κύμα, 
ανάσα ωκεανού. Ωραίος, ανάλαφρος ο ίλιγγος τούτος,  
πρόσεξε, θα πέσεις. Μην κοιτάς εμένα, εμένα η θέση μου 

είναι το ταλάντευμα- ο εξαίσιος ίλιγγος. Έτσι κάθε 
απόβραδο έχω λιγάκι πονοκέφαλο, κάτι ζαλάδες. 

Συχνά πετάγομαι στο φαρμακείο απέναντι για καμμιάν 
ασπιρίνη, Άλλοτε πάλι βαριέμαι και μένω με τον 

πονοκέφαλο μου ν’ ακούω μες στους τοίχους τον κούφιο 
θόρυβο που κάνουν οι σωλήνες 

του vερού, η ψήνω έναν καφέ, και, πάντα αφηρημένη, 
ξεχνιέμαι κ’ ετοιμάζω δυο ποιος να τον πιει τον άλλο; 
αστείο αλήθεια, τον αφήνω στο περβάζι να κρυώνει 

η κάποτε πίνω και τον δεύτερο, κοιτάζοντας απ’ το παράθυρο 
τον πράσινο γλόμπο του φαρμακείου 

σαν το πράσινο φως ενός αθόρυβου τραίνου που 
έρχεται να με πάρει με τα μαντίλια μου, τα 

στραβοπατημένα μου παπούτσια, τη μαύρη τσάντα 
μου, τα ποιήματα μου, χωρίς καθόλου βαλίτσες- τ ί ν α  

τις κάνεις; Άφησε μεναρθω μαζί σου. 
Ά, φεύγεις; Καληνύχτα. Όχι, δε θαρθω.  

Καληνύχτα. Εγώ θα βγω σε λίγο. Ευχαριστώ. Γιατί, 
επιτέλους, πρέπει να βγω απ' αυτό το τσακισμένο σπίτι. 
Πρέπει να δω λιγάκι πολιτεία, όχι, όχι το φεγγάρι την 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    241                            

 

  

πολιτεία μετά ροζιασμένα χέρια της, την πολιτεία του 
μεροκάματου, την πολιτεία που ορκίζεται στο ψωμί και 
στη γροθιά της την πολιτεία που όλους μας αντέχει στη 

ράχη της 
με τις μικρότητες μας, τις κακίες, τις έχτρες μας, 

με τις φιλοδοξίες, την άγνοια μας και τα γερατειά μας, ν’ 
ακούσω τα μεγάλα βήματα της πολιτείας, 

να μην ακούω πια τα βήματα σου μήτε τα βήματα του 
Θεού, μήτε και τα δικά μου βήματα. Καληνύχτα. 

(Το δωμάτιο σκοτεινιάζει. Φαίνεται πως κάποιο σύννεφο 
θακρυψε το φεγγάρι. Μονομιάς, σαν κάποιο χέρι να 
δυνάμωσε το ραδιόφωνο του γειτονικού μπαρ, 

ακούστηκε μια πολύ γνωστή μουσική φράση. Και τότε 
κατάλαβα πως όλη τούτη τη σκηνή τη συνόδευε 

χαμηλόφωνα η «Σονάτα του Σεληνόφωτος», μόνο το πρώτο 
μέρος. Ο Νέος θα κατηφορίζει τώρα μ’ ένα ειρωνικό κ' ίσως 
συμπονετικό χαμόγελο στα καλογραμμένα χείλη του και μ’ 
ένα συναίσθημα απελευθέρωσης. Όταν θα φτάσει ακριβώς 
στον Αη-Νικόλα, πριν κατέβει τη μαρμάρινη σκάλα, θα 

γελάσει,- ένα γέλιο δυνατό, ασυγκράτητο. Το γέλιο του δε θ’ 
ακουστεί καθόλου ανάρμοστα κάτω απ’ το φεγγάρι. Ίσως το 

μόνο ανάρμοστο ναναι το ότι δεν είναι καθόλου 
ανάρμοστο. Σε λίγο ο Νέος θα σωπάσει, θα σοβαρευτεί 

και θα πει: «Η παρακμή μιας εποχής». Έτσι, ολότελα 
ήσυχος πια, θα ξεκουμπώσει πάλι τι πουκάμισο του και θα 
τραβήξει το δρόμο του. Όσο για τη γυναίκα με τα μαύρα, 
δεν ξέρω αν βγήκε τελικά απ’ το σπίτι. Το φεγγαρόφωτο 
λάμπει ξανά. Και στις γωνίες του δωματιού οι σκιές 

σφίγγονται από μιαν αβάσταχτη μετάνοια, σχεδόν οργή, όχι 
τόσο για τη ζω ή , όσο για την άχρηστη εξομολόγηση. 

Ακούτε; Το ραδιόφωνο συνεχίζει): 
 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    242                            

 

  

[Index] 

Sarantaris Yioryos (1907 - 1941) 
 

 
 

 

Sarandaris George was born on  1907 in Istanbul but lived with his family in Italy 
between of two and twenty four. He died in Athens on 1941.  There he studied law and took 
his degree from the University Macerata. While in Italy he wrote most of his poetry in Italian, 
some in Greek, and some in French. He came to Greece in 1931 to fulfill his military service, 
made infrequent trips to Italy, and died oh 1941 FROM, hardships suffered as a common 
soldier in the war with Italy In addition to his poetry he published three books of 
philosophical speculation. Spurning the poetry of despair typical of his generation, he also 
broke with traditional metrical forms of the neoromantic movement and wrote in free verse 
with a minimum of punctuation promise. 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιώργος Σαραντάρης γεννήθηκε το 1907 στην Κωνσταντινούπολη αλλά έζησε με 
την οικογένειά του στην Ιταλία μεταξύ δύο και εικοσιτεσσάρων ετών. Πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 
1941. Σπούδασε Νομικά στο Πανεπιστήμιο της Μπολόνια δείχνοντας από νωρίς την τάση του 
προς την ποίηση. Στην Ιταλία έγραψε το μεγαλύτερο μέρος της ποίησής του στα ιταλικά 
μερικά στα ελληνικά και μερικά στα γαλλικά. Ήρθε στην Ελλάδα το 1931 να εκπληρώσει τη 
στρατιωτική του θητεία, κάνοντας και μερικά ταξίδια στην Ιταλία. Πέθανε το 1941 από τις 
κακουχίες που αντιμετώπιζε ως στρατιώτης στον πόλεμο με την Ιταλία. Πέραν της ποίησης 
δημοσίευσε και τρία βιβλία της φιλοσοφικής κερδοσκοπίας. Απέριπτε την ποίηση της γενιάς 
του και έβαλε τις παραδοσιακές μετρικές μορφές του νεορομαντικού κινήματος γράφοντας σε 
ελεύθερο στίχο με ελάχιστα σημεία στίξης. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    243                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

I have seen eternity 

(1940) 

 

Έχω δει την αιωνιότητα 

(1940) 
 

I have seen eternity in the forest Come toward me 
trampling on corpses But when all were raised from the 

dead the moment glow The stars smiled And the sea rose 
like the pulse of our hearts Then eternity appeared 

wearing a fustanella 
 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar  

 

Έχω δει την αιωνιότητα μέσα στο δάσος Για να έρθει 
προς εμένα έπάτησε πτώματα Αλλά ή στιγμή έφεξε 

όπου όλοι αναστήθηκαν Τ' αστέρια χαμογέλασαν Κι 
ή θάλασσα ανέβηκε σαν ήχος τις καρδιές μας Τότε ή 

αιωνιότητα φάνηκε ντυμένη φουστανέλλα. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    244                            

 

  

[Index] 

Sahtouris Miltos (1919 - 2005) 
 

 
 

 

Sahtouris Miltos was born on 1919, but regards the illustrious island of Hydra as his 
place of origin, for there his great-great-grandfather, Yiorgios Sahtouris, assured his place in 
history as one of the admirals of the Greek War of Independence. He died in Athens on 2005. 
He enrolled in the School of Law at the University of Athens. In 1956 he won the first prize in 
an international contest for young poets sponsored by the Italian Radio and Television 
System, and in 1972 was given a Ford Foundation Grant. The author of eleven books of 
poetry, he won the Second State Prize for 1962, and a joint Slate Prize for 1964. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Γεννημένος στην Αθήνα το 1919, υπηρέτησε με πίστη και σεμνότητα τα ελληνικά 
γράμματα. Καταγόταν από την Ύδρα και ήταν δισέγγονος του ναυάρχου της Επανάστασης 
του 1821, Καπετάν Γιώργη Σαχτούρη. Το 1937 γράφεται στη Νομική Σχολή Πανεπιστημίου 
Αθηνών αλλά το 1940 την εγκατέλειψε για ν' αφοσιωθεί στη ποίηση. Πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 
2005. Το 1956 κέρδισε το πρώτο βραβείο σε έναν διεθνή διαγωνισμό για τους νέους ποιητές 
που υποστηριζόταν από το ιταλικό ραδιόφωνο και τηλεόραση, και το 1972 του δόθηκε 
επιχορήγηση από το ιδρύμα Ford Foundation. Εϊναι συντάκτης ένδεκα βιβλίων ποίησης. 
Κέρδισε το δεύτερο κρατικό βραβείο το 1962, και ένα ακόμη το 1964, 

  

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    245                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The soldier poet 

(1957) 

 

Ο Στρατιώτης ποιητής 

(1957) 
 

I have not written poems 
amid alarms 
amid alarms 

has my life gone its way 
One day I tremble  

the next day I shudder 
in fear in fear has my life moved on 

I have not written poems 
 I have not written poems  

I only nail crosses on graves 
 
 

Translated by:  Kinom Friar   

 

Δεν έχω γράψει ποιήματα  
μέσα σε κρότους  
μέσα σε κρότους  
κύλησε η ζωή μου 

Την μιαν ήμερα έτρεμα  
την άλλη ανατρίχιαζα  

μέσα στο φόβο  
μέσα στο φόβο πέρασε η ζωή μου 

Δεν έχω γράψει ποιήματα  
δεν έχω γράψει ποιήματα  

μόνο σταυρούς σε μνήματακαρφώνω. 
 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    246                            

 

  

[Index] 

Seferis Yiorgos (1900 - 1971) 
 

 
 

 

Seferis Yioryos was born on 1900 in Smyrna, Turkey, and died in Athens on 1971. 
His family moved to Athens in 1914.He took his degree in law at the University of Paris, 
1918-24, and in 1926 was  appointed to the Royal Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs serving 
inmany positions in Athens, London, Albania, Pretoria and finally as Ambassador to Great 
Britain, 1957-62, after which he retired from diplomatic service and settled in Athens. He was 
granted honorary degrees by many Universities of Cambridge. He was granted in 1963 the 
Nobel Prize in Poetry. Seferis is a poet of evocative symbols and metaphysical distinctions. 
All of his mature poetry is written in a free verse of great sinuousness, rhythmical yet 
modulated, which never rises in tone or diction beyond the “conversation between intellectual 
men” as Ezra Pound has it. In the center of each of his poems is the poet himself, looking 
back into the mythological past of his country and her symbols, retracing her history, and 
telling a story which has the independent validity of imaginative fiction. 
 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιώργος Σεφέρης γεννήθηκε το 1900 στη Σμύρνη και πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 1971. 
Η οικογένειά του μετανάστευσε στην Αθήνα το 1914. Πήρε το πτυχίο νομικής από το 
Πανεπιστήμιο του Παρισιού, το 1924, και το 1926 διορίστηκε στο Υπουργείο Εξωτερικά και 
υπηρέτησε σε διέφορες θέσεις στην Αθήνα, Λονδίνο, Αλβανία, Πραιτώρια και τελικά ως 
πρεσβευτής στη Μεγάλη Βρετανία, το 1957-62, όπου μετά αποσύρθηκε από τη διπλωματική 
υπηρεσία και εγκαταστάθηκε στην Αθήνα.  Του χορηγήθηκαν οι τιμητικοί βαθμοί από πολλά 
πανεπιστήμια του Καίμπριτζ. Του χορηγήθηκε το 1963 το βραβείο Νόμπελ στην ποίηση. Ο 
Σεφέρης δεν είναι εύκολος ποιητής αλλά δεν είναι σκοτεινός. Η γλώσσα που μιλά είναι 
δύσκολη, στη γλώσσα όμως αυτή η φωνή του είναι καθαρή και απερίφραστη. Δίνει στον 
αναγνώστη συχνά την εντύπωση πως πέτυχε την καίρια έκφραση, που δεν μπορεί να ειπωθεί 
αλλιώς. Αυτό είναι το πιο αξιαγάπητο στην ποίησή του, η απλότητα που φτάνει στη 
θερμότητα μιας εξομολόγησης. Η ποίηση του Σεφέρη δεν είναι βέβαια χαρούμενη. Είναι 
απαισιόδοξη και μελαγχολική. Έχει τη θλίψη του ανθρώπου που συλλογίζεται πολύ πάνω στα 
ανθρώπινα, κι ακόμα του Έλληνα με το κατακάθι της πίκρας από τη σκλαβιά και τις εθνικές 
περιπέτειες. Ωστόσο η διάθεση αυτή δεν οδηγεί στην άρνηση ή στην καταστροφή. Από την 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    247                            

 

  

άλλη πλευρά του σκοταδιού είναι το φως, μαύρο και αγγελικό, "από το μέρος του ήλιου" στο 
κάστρο της Ασίνης θα ανεβεί στο τέλος "ασπιδοφόρος ο ήλιος πολεμώντας". Κάτω από την 
άρνηση υπάρχει μια πίστη που προστατεύει από την απελπισία, και μια στιβαρή αίσθηση των 
πραγμάτων που προφυλάσσει από τη διάλυση και το μηδενισμό. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    248                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The king of Asine 

(1938) 

 

Ο βασιλιάς της Ασίνης 

(1938) 
 

Ασίνην τε . . . 
All that morning we looked about the castle 

beginning from the shadowy side where the sea 
green and without brilliance, breast of a slain peacock, 

received us like time without break. 
Veins of rock descended from high above, 

twisted vines, bare, many-branched, coming aiive 
at the touch of water, while the eye in following them 

strove to escape the fatiguing undulation 
and constantly weakened, 

On the sunny side a long extended coastline 
and the light grating diamonds on the great walls. 
Not a single creature alive, the wild pigeons flown, 

and the King of Asine, for whom we have sought two years 
now unknown, forgotten by all, even by Homer 
only one word in the Iliad, and that uncertain 

flung here like a gold burial mask. 
You touched it, remember the sound? hollow in the light like 

a dry jug in the dug earth 
and the same sound of our oars on the sea. 

The King of Asine a void under the mask 
everywhere with us, everywhere with us, under a name: 

"Άσίνην τε . . . Άσίνην τε . . ." 
and his children statues and his desires the fluttering of 

birds, and the wind in the intervals of his meditations and his 
ships moored in a vanished harbor; a void under the mask. 

Behind the large eyes the curved lips the curled hair 
embossed on the golden covering of our existence a spot of 

darkness that glides like a fish in the dawning calm of the 
sea, and you watch it: a void everywhere with us. And the 
bird that in another winter flew away with broken wing the 

tabernacle of life, and the young woman who went away to 

 

Άσίνην τε... 
Κοιτάξαμε όλο το πρωί γύρω-γύρω το κάστρο 
αρχίζοντας από το μέρος του ίσκιου εκεί που ή 

θάλασσα πράσινη και χωρίς αναλαμπή, το στήθος 
σκοτωμένου παγονιού μάς δέχτηκε όπως ο καιρός 

χωρίς κανένα χάσμα. Οι φλέβες του βράχου κατέβαιναν 
από ψηλά στριμμένα κλήματα γυμνά πολύκλωνα 

ζωντανεύοντας στ' άγγιγμα του νερού, καθώς το μάτι 
ακολουθώντας τις πάλευε να  εφύγει το κουραστικό 
λίκνισμα χάνοντας δύναμη ολοένα.  Από το μέρος του 
ήλιου ένας μακρύς γιαλός ολάνοιχτος και το φως 

τρίβοντας διαμαντικά στα μεγάλα τείχη. Κανένα πλάσμα 
ζωντανό τ' αγριοπερίστερα φευγάτα κι ο βασιλιάς τής 
Ασίνης που τον γυρεύουμε δύο χρόνια τώρα άγνωστος 
λησμονημένος απ’ όλους κι από τον 'Όμηρο μόνο μια 
λέξη στην Ιλιάδα κι εκείνη αβέβαιη ριγμένη εδώ σαν την 
εντάφια χρυσή προσωπίδα. την άγγιξες, θυμάσαι τον 
ήχο της; κούφιο μέσα στο φως σαν το στεγνό πιθάρι 

στο σκαμμένο χώμα. 
κι ο ίδιος ήχος μες στη θάλασσα με τα κουπιά μας. 

.0 βασιλιάς τής  Ασίνης ένα κενό κάτω άπ' την 
προσωπίδα παντού μαζί μας παντού μαζί μας, κάτω 

από ένα όνομα: 
 «Άσίνην τε... Άσίνην τε...» 

και τα παιδιά του αγάλματα κι οι πόθοι του 
φτερουγίσματα πουλιών κι ο αγέρας στα διαστήματα 
των στοχασμών του και τα καράβια του αραγμένα σ' 
άφαντο λιμάνι. κάτω άπ' την προσωπίδα ένα κενό. 
Πίσω από τα μεγάλα μάτια τα καμπύλα χείλια τους 

βοστρύχους ανάγλυφα στο μαλαματένιο σκέπασμα τής 
ύπαρξής μας ένα σημείο σκοτεινό που ταξιδεύει σαν το 

ψάρι 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    249                            

 

  

play with the dogteeth of summer, and the soul that sought 
the underworld screeching and the country like a large plane 

tree leaf that the torrent of the sun sweeps away with 
ancient monuments and contemporary sorrow. And the poet 

looks at the stones and lingers, asking himself 
are there I wonder among these broken lines peaks edges 

hollows and curves are there I wonder 
here at the meeting place of wind ram and rum 

are there the movement of feature the form of the affection 
of those who have so strangely dwindled in our lives of 
those who have remained wave-shadows and thoughts 

boundless as the sea  
or no, perhaps nothing remains but the weight only 

nostalgia for the weight of a Jiving existence 
there where we live now without substance, bowed under 

like the withes of the dreadful willow heaped up in a duration 
of despair  while the yellow current slowly bears away reeds 

uprooted from the mire, 
image of a form turned to stone under the sentence of a 

bitterness everlasting,  the poet a void. 
The shield-bearing sun rose fighting  

and from the depths of a cavern a frightened bat crashed on 
the light like an arrow on a shield: "Άσίνην τε . . . Άσίνην τε . 

. ." 
Was this the King of Asine for whom we have sought so 

carefully on this acropolis feeling at times with our fingers 
his touch upon the stones? 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

μέσα στην αυγινή γαλήνη του πελάγου και το βλέπεις: 
ένα κενό παντού μαζί μας. Και το πούλι που πέταξε τον 
άλλο χειμώνα με σπασμένη φτερούγα σκήνωμα ζωής, κι 
ή νέα γυναίκα που έφυγε να παίξει με τα σκυλόδοντα 
του  αλοκαιριού κι ή ψυχή πού γύρεψε τσιρίζοντας τον 
κάτω κόσμο κι ο τόπος σαν το μεγάλο' πλατανόφυλλο 
που παρασέρνει ο χείμαρρος του ήλιου με τ' αρχαία 

μνημεία και τη σύγχρονη θλίψη. Κι ο ποιητής αργοπορεί 
κοιτάζοντας τις πέτρες κι αναρωτιέται υπάρχουν άραγε 
ανάμεσα στις χαλασμένες τούτες γραμμές, τις ακμές τις 
αιχμές τα κοίλα και τις καμπύλες υπάρχουν άραγε εδώ 
που συναντιέται το πέρασμα τής βροχής του αγέρα και 
της φθοράς υπάρχουν, ή κίνηση του προσώπου το 
σχήμα τής στοργής εκείνων που λιγόστεψαν τόσο 

παράξενα μες στη ζωή μας αυτών που απόμειναν σκιές 
κυμάτων και στοχασμοί με την απεραντοσύνη του 

πελάγου η μήπως όχι δεν απομένει τίποτε παρά μόνο το 
βάρος ή νοσταλγία του βάρους μιας ύπαρξης ζωντανής 
εκεί που μένουμε τώρα ανυπόστατοι λυγίζοντας σαν τα 
κλωνάρια της φριχτής ιτιάς σωριασμένα μέσα στη 

διάρκεια της απελπισίας ενώ το ρέμα κίτρινο κατεβάζει 
αργά βούρλα ξεριζωμένα μές στο βούρκο εικόνα μορφής 

που μαρμάρωσε με την απόφαση μιας πίκρας 
παντοτινής. 0 ποιητής ένα κενό. Ασπιδοφόρος ο ήλιος 
ανέβαινε πολεμώντας κι από το βάθος της σπηλιάς μια 
νυχτερίδα τρομαγμένη χτύπησε πάνω στο φως σαν τη 

σαΐτα πάνω στο σκουτάρι: 
«' Ασίνη ν τε.:. ' Ασίνην τε...».  

Νά 'ταν αότη δ βασιλιας τής , Ασίνη ς που τον  
υρεύουμε τόσο προσεχτικά σε τούτη την ακρόπολη 

γγίζοντας κάποτε με τα δάχτυλά μας την αφή του πάνω 
στις πέτρες. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    250                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Helen 

(1953) 

 

Ελένη 

(1953) 
 

"The nightingales won’t let you sleep in Platres." 
Shy nightingale, amid the respiration of leaves, 
you who bestow the forest's musical coolness 

on bodies separated and on the souls 
of those who know they will not return. 

Blind voice, who in the night glooming memory grope 
for footsteps and gestures; Ι would not dare say kisses; 

and the bitter turbulence of the slave-woman grown savage. 
 "The nightingales won't let you sleep in Platres." What is 

Platres'! Who knows this island? 
Ι have lived my life hearing names for the first time heard:  
new places, new insanities of men or of the gods; My fate 

that wavers between the final sword of an Ajax and another 
Salamis had brought me here tο this shore. The moon rose 

out of the sea like Aphrodite, covered the stars of the 
Archer, now goes to find the Heart of Scorpio, and changes 

everything. 
Where is truth? Ι too was an archer in the war; 
my fate: that of a man who missed the target. 

Nightingale, minstrel, οn such a night as this by the sea's 
rim of Proteus the Spartan slaνe-girls heard you and 

dragged out their lament, and among them-who would have 
thought it? was Helen! 

She whom we pursued for years by the Scamander. 
She was there, at the desert's edge; Ι touched her, she 

spoke to me: 
''It's not true, it's not true," she cried. 

''Ι never boarded that blue-prowed vessel. 
Ι never set foot on valiant Troy." 

With full breast-band, sun on hair, and this stature of hers. 
shadows and smiles everywhere, on shoulders on thighs on 

knees; animated skin, and those eyes 

 

«Τ’ αηδόνια δε σ' αφήνουνε να κοιμηθείς στις Πλάτρες» 
Αηδόνι ντροπαλό, μες στον ανασασμό των φύλλων, 
σύ που δωρίζεις τη μουσική δροσιά του δάσους . 
στα χωρισμένα σώματα και στις ψυχές αυτών που 
ξέρουν πως δε θα γυρίσουν. Τυφλή φωνή, που 
ψηλαφείς μέσα στη νυχτωμένη μνήμη βήματα και 

χειρονομίες, δε θα τολμούσα να πω φιλήματα και το 
πικρό τρικύμισμα τής αγριεμένης σκλάβας 

«Τ' αηδόνια δε σ' αφήνουνε νά κοιμηθείς στις Πλάτρες». 
Ποίες είναι οι Πλάτρες; Ποιός το γνωρίζει τούτο το νησί; 
'Έζησα τη ζωή μου ακούγοντας ονόματα πρωτάκουστα: 

καινούργιους τόπους, καινούργιες τρέλες των 
ανθρώπων ή των θεών ή μοίρα μου που κυματίζει 

ανάμεσα στο στερνό σπαθί ενός Αϊαντα 
και μίαν άλλη Σαλαμίνα μ' έφερε εδώ σ' αυτό το 
γυρογιάλι. Το φεγγάρι βγήκε απ' το πέλαγο σαν 

Αφροδίτη, σκέπασε τ' άστρα του Τοξότη, τώρα πάει νά 
’βρει την καρδιά του Σκορπιού, κι όλα τ' αλλάζει. Που 
ειν’ ή αλήθεια; 'Ήμουν κι εγώ στον πόλεμο τοξότης το 
ριζικό μου, ενός ανθρώπου που ξαστόχησε, Αηδόνι 
ποιητάρη, σαν και μια τέτοια νύχτα στ' ακροθαλάσσι 

του Πρωτέα 
 σ' άκουσαν οι σκλάβες Σπαρτιάτισσες κι έσυραν το 

θρήνο, κι ανάμεσό τους ποιος θα το 'λεγε  ή Ελένη! Αύτη 
που κυνηγούσαμε χρόνια στο Σκάμαντρο. Ηταν εκεί, 

στα χείλια τής έρήμου, την άγγιξα, μου μίλησε: «Δεν ειν’ 
αλήθεια, δεν ειν’ αλήθεια» φώναζε. «Δε μπήκα στο 

γαλαζόπλευρο καράβι. Ποτέ δεν πάτησα την 
αντρειωμένη Τροία». 

Με το βαθύ στηθόδεσμο, τον ήλιο στα μαλλιά, κι αυτό το 
ανάστημα ίσκιοι και χαμόγελα παντού 

στους ώμους στους μηρούς στα γόνατα ζωντανό δέρμα, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    251                            

 

  

with their large eyelids, she was there, on the bank of a 
Delta. And at Troy? Nothing at Troy-a phantom. 

That's how the gods willed it. And Paris lay with a shadow 
as though it were solid flesh;  and we were slaughtered ten 
years for Helen. Great suffering had fallen οη Greece. So 

many bodies cast 
into the jaws of the sea, the jaws of the earth; 

so many souls given over to the millstones, like wheat. 
And the rivers swelled with blood amid the mire 

for a linen indulation for a cloud for the fluttering of a 
butterf1y, the down of a swan for an empty garment, for a 

Helen. And my brother? Nightingale nightingale nightingale, 
what is a god? what is not a god? and what is between the 

two? "The nightingales won't let you sleep in Platres." 
Tearful bird, on sea-kissed Cyprus so ordained as to remind 

me of my country, 
Ι anchored alone with this fable, if it's true that this is a 
fable, if it's true that men will ηοΙ take υρ once more the 

ancient deceit of the gods; if it's true 
that some other Teucer, years afterwards, or some Ajax or 
Priam or Hecuba or someone quite unknown, anonymous, 

yet one who saw a Scamander overbrimming with corpses is 
not fated to hear 

messengers who come to say that so much suffering so 
much life plunged into an abyss 

for an empty garment for a Helen. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

και τα μάτια με τα μεγάλα βλέφαρα, ήταν εκεί, στην 
όχθη ενός Δέλτα. Και στην Τροία; Τίποτε στην Τροία - 
ένα είδωλο. 'Έτσι το θέλαν οι θεοί. Κι ο Πάρης, μ' έναν 
ίσκιο πλάγιαζε σα νά ήταν πλάσμα ατόφιο' κι εμείς 
σφαζόμασταν για την Ελένη δέκα χρόνια. Μεγάλος 

πόνος είχε πέσει στην "Ελλάδα. Τόσα κορμιά ριγμένα 
στα σαγόνια της θάλασσας στα σαγόνια της γης  τόσες 

ψυχές 
δοσμένες στις μυλόπετρες, σαν το σιτάρι. 

Κι οι ποταμοί φούσκωναν μες στη λάσπη το αίμα 
για ένα λινό κυμάτισμα για μια νεφέλη 

μιας πεταλούδας τίναγμα το πούπουλο ενός κύκνου 
για ένα πουκάμισο αδειανό, για μιαν Ελένη. 
Κι ο αδερφός μου; Αηδόνι, αηδόνι , αηδόνι, 

τ' είναι θεός; τί μη θεός; και τί τ' άνάμεσό τους; 
«Τ' αηδόνια δε σ' αφήνουνε να κοιμηθείς στις Πλάτρες». 
Δακρυσμένο πουλί, στην Κύπρο τη θαλασσοφίλητη που 
έταξαν για να μου θυμίζει την πατρίδα, άραξα μοναχός 

μ' αυτό το παραμύθι, 
αν είναι αλήθεια πως αυτό είναι παραμύθι, αν είναι 

αλήθεια πως οι άνθρωποι δε θα ξαναπιάσουν τον παλιό 
δόλο των θεών αν είναι αλήθεια πως κάποιος άλλος 
Τεύκρος, ύστερα από χρόνια, ή κάποιος Αίαντας ή 

Πρίαμος ή Εκάβη ή κάποιος άγνωστος, ανώνυμος, που 
ωστόσο είδε ένα Σκάμαντρο να ξεχειλάει κουφάρια, δεν 
το 'χει μες στη μοίρα του ν' ακούσει . μαντατοφόρους 
που ερχουνται να πούνε πως τόσος πόνος τόση ζωή 
πήγαν στην άβυσσο για ένα πουκάμισο αδειανό για 

μιαν Ελένη. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    252                            

 

  

[Index] 

Sikelianos Angelos (1884 - 1951) 
 

 
 

 

Angelos Sikelianos was born on 1884 on the Ioanian island of Lefkadha and died in 
Athens 1951. In 1900 he enrolled in the School of Law at the University of Athens as but left 
after two years to devote himself exclusively to Poetry. In 1907 he married Eva Parlmer. The 
focus of his life was the formation, with Eva, of the Delphic Festivals in 1927 and 1930. At 
Delphi, where the Amphictyonic council used to convene, Sikelianos hoped to found a cosmic 
center where, through a dedication into a religious view of life without dogma, he nations of 
the world might meet to insure peace and justice. In 1929 the Athens Academy awarded him 
and Eva silver medals "for their courageous efforts to resurrect the Olympic games," but 
failed to elect him as a member when he was nominated in 1951. Sikejianos was a poet in the 
grand tradition, a prophet and seer, a man of high vision and noble actions, one who had 
assimilated the cultural traditions of his own nation and those of the modern world, a 
revolutionary democrat and mystic who acted beyond the particular creeds and religious faiths 
of the world. His vision was pantheistic and panhellenic, and his poetry, with it wide 
rhetorical sweep and philosophical poem and, in his later years, the poetic drama. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Άγγελος Σικελιανός γεννήθηκε το 1884 στο Λεφκάδα και πέθανε στην Αθήνα το 
1951. Το 1900 γράφτηκε στη νομική σχολή του Πανεπιστημίου της Αθήνας αλλά 
εγκατέλειψε μετά από δύο έτη για να αφιερωθεί αποκλειστικά στην ποίηση. Το 1907 
παντρεύτηκε την Έυα Παλμερ. Η αρχαιοελληνική πνευματική ατμόσφαιρα απασχόλησε 
βαθιά τον Σικελιανό και συνέλαβε την ιδέα να δημιουργηθεί στους Δελφούς ένας παγκόσμιος 
πνευματικός πυρήνας ικανός να συνθέσει τις αντιθέσεις των λαών ("Δελφική Ιδέα"). Για το 
σκοπό αυτό, ο Σικελιανός, με τη συμπαράσταση και οικονομική αρωγή της γυναίκας του, 
δίνει πλήθος διαλέξεων και δημοσιεύει μελέτες και άρθρα. Παράλληλα, οργανώνει τις 
"Δελφικές Εορτές" στους Δελφούς με τις παραστάσεις του Προμηθέα Δεσμώτη (1927) και 
των Ικέτιδων (1930) του Αισχύλου να ανεβαίνουν στο αρχαίο θέατρο. Η "Δελφική Ιδέα" 
εκτός από τις αρχαίες παραστάσεις περιελάμβανε και την "Δελφική Ένωση", μια παγκόσμια 
ένωση για τη συναδέλφωση των λαών, και το "Δελφικό Πανεπιστήμιο", στόχος του οποίου 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    253                            

 

  

θα ήταν να συνθέσει σε έναν ενιαίο μύθο τις παραδόσεις όλων των λαών. Για τις 
πρωτοβουλίες αυτές, το 1929, η Ακαδημία Αθηνών απένειμε στο Σικελιανό αργυρό μετάλιο 
για τη γενναία προσπάθεια αναβίωσης των δελφικών αγώνων. Από το φιλόδοξο αυτό σχέδιο 
το μόνο που πραγματοποιήθηκε τελικά ήταν οι Δελφικές Εορτές, αλλά και αυτές οδήγησαν 
σε οικονομική καταστροφή και χωρισμό του ζεύγους, αφού η Εύα Πάλμερ εγκαταστάθηκε 
από τότε στην Αμερική και επέστρεψε μόνο μετά το θάνατο του ποιητή. Κατά τη διάρκεια 
της γερμανικής κατοχής, ο Σικελιανός διαδραμάτισε σημαντικό ρόλο στην πνευματική 
αντίσταση του λαού, με κορυφαία εκδήλωση το ποίημα και το λόγο που εκφώνησε στην 
κηδεία του Παλαμά το 1943. Tο 1946 εξελέγη πρόεδρος της Εταιρείας Ελλήνων Λογοτεχνών 
ενώ το 1949 ήταν υποψήφιος για το Βραβείο Νομπέλ. Το όραμά του ήταν πανθεϊστικό και 
πανελληνικό, και η ποίησή του, με το ευρέως ρητορικό πέρασμα και φιλοσοφικό ποίημα και, 
στα τελευταια του χρόνια, το ποιητικό δράμα. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    254                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Greek supper for the dead 

(1941) 

 

Ελληνικός νεκρόδειπνος 

(1941) 
 

(Ο Dionysos-Hades, my divine protector!) 
Because my friends had waited long to hear 
flaming new songs rise to my lips, as once 

they knew the artery of my speech would burst 
and flood like a fiery stream, they had invited me 

far out from the city here to dine in this 
large room with all its windows opened wide 

on deep-set gardens and all the stars above them. 
On the linen cloth between the crystal cups 
they had set scarlet roses, and had hung 
green wreaths upon the walls from which 

a fragrant and languid odor emanated; 
in silver candelabra they had lit 

candles whose flames, in a slight breeze flickering, 
everywhere leant and lengthened, but burnt on. 

Then of the frugal meal before us we ate 
in a long silence, for all unwillingly 

our minds were twisted around one single thought; 
but when the black wine my beloved friend 

had brought for me was served, fragrant and brusque 
as the blood οf Dionysos spilled, he turned 

toward me with his great glass filled to the brim, 
and calling me by name, said: “Angelos, 

now if you wish, give voice unto the night.” 
But Ι replied: “And do you ask, Ο friend, 

that Ι give voice even unto this night 
which like that very glass you hold is filled 

up to the brim, this night which may be said 
to set a last circumference round our souls 

and is the same circumference of our silence? 
Tell me, who was it took such careful pains 

oνer this meal, or like a hierophant 

 

(Ω Διόνυσε – Άδη, Θείε μου προστάτη!) 
Καρτερούσαν οι φίλοι μου ν’ ακούσουν 
νέα φλογερά τραγούδια ν’ ανατείλουν 
στα χείλη μου, όπως ξέρανε από πάντα 
την αρτηρία του λόγου μου να σφύζει 
σαν πύρινο ποτάμι κι όπως μ’ είχαν 

σε μακρινό τραπέζι καλεσμένο 
έξω απ’ τη χώρα, σε μεγάλο δώμα, 
μ’ ανοιχτά τα παράθυρα σε κήπους 

βαθιούς και μ’ όλα απάνωθέ τους τα’ άστρα… 
Και με ρόδα είχαν άλικα στολίσει 

το λινό μες στη μέση απ’ τα κρουστάλια 
και στεφάνια εκρεμάσανε στους τοίχους, 

οπού ευωδιές λιγωτικές αφήναν 
και σ’ ασημένιους μέσα κεροστάτες 
κεριά είχαν αναμμένα, που, στη λίγη 
τ’ αέρα πνοή, τις φλόγες τους λύγιζαν 

μακριές, εδώ κ’ εκεί, χωρίς να σβήσουν… 
Κι αμίλητοι ’γευόμαστε μπροστά μας 
το λιτό δείπνο, τι αθελά μας όλοι 

την ίδια σκέψη εκλώθαμεν… Αλλ’ όταν 
ανοιχτή εμπρός μας το κρασί το μαύρο, 

που φίλος επιστήθιος το ‘χε φέρει 
για μένα, αδρό γιατ’ ήταν κ’ ευωδούσε 
σαν του Διονύσου το χυμένον αίμα, 
γυρίζοντας εκείνος προς εμένα 
τρανό ποτήρι ξέχειλο, με το ίδιο 

καλώντας με ονομά μου: «Άγγελε, μου ’πε, 
αν τώρα θες, δώσε φωνή στην νύχτα…» 
Και τότε εγώ : « Στη νύχτα τούτη, φίλε, 
ζητάς φωνή να δώσω, π’ όπως το ίδιο 
ποτήρι που κρατάς, ως το στεφάνι 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    255                            

 

  

stood over it and so adorned it that 
it now seems meant to be Pluto's sacred portion 

or the entowered lonely Supper for the Dead 
and where deep in the thoughts of each before it 

the rites of their memorial service glow? 
For as upon an ear of wheat a host 

of winged ants falls, so have the souls of all 
the dead who wake within our hearts enclosed 

this feast, those souls of men whose steps and shapes 
we and the eternal night still deeply hold 
within us, as in silence once they climbed 

above the rocks and beyond the high lookouts 
of death to drink deep at the wells of courage. 

But numberless other ancient spirits now, 
numerous other souls that fill the night 

are swarming still, Ι feel, from every corner, 
drawn by the fervor of our silent hearts, 

like moths attracted to the candle's flame, 
until the dead by far outnumber the living. 
Ο let them come here eνen to us, Ο friends, 

tο spread invisibly their open hands 
over this feast of Pluto's, let them come 
to this entowered Supper for the Dead, 

even here among us, and with us be One. 
And with this glass you gave me, friend, 
filled to the brim, wherein now if Ι bend 
Ι see my face as if reflected from out 

another world, and with this wine you brought me, 
fragrant and brusque as blood of Dionysos 

spilled, let us like the Initiates of old 
from the great goblet of Agathodemon 
drink as from rites of holy sacrament, 

and keep a silence profound until that time 
(may it not be far off, my friends) when all 
the powers of God shall suddenly begin 

to groan within us deeply, when his roars, 
louder than sound of earthquake, shall rouse up living and 

dead together in full array 

γεμάτο, λες το σύνορο έχει βάλει 
στις ψυχές μας το ακρότατον, οπού ’ναι 

το σύνορο της ίδιας σιωπής μας; 
Πες, ποιος εγνοιάστη ετούτο το τραπέζι, 

ή στάθηκε από πάνω ιεροφάντης 
να το στολίσει, κ’ είναι  σα μεράδι 

του Πλούτωνα ιερό, σαν πυργωμένος 
ερημικός νεκρόδειπνος οπού όλων 

μπροστά του η σκέψη καίει και λειτουργάει 
μνημόσυνο βαθιά της ; Τί, όπως σ’ ένα 
σπυρί σταριού το φτερωτό μυρμήγκι 
πέφτει φουσάτο απάνω του, παρόμοια 
λογιάζω έχουν κυκλώσει αυτό το δείπνο 

ψυχές ωεκρών που εμείς κ’ η αιώνια νύχτα 
βαθιά ’χουμε τ’ αχνάρι τους κρατήσει, 

σαν, πιο ψηλά απ’ τη βίγλα του θανάτου, 
ανηφορούσαν σιωπηλοί στα βράχια 

να πιούν στου θάρρους την πηγή· μα κι άλλες 
πολλές ψυχές τη νύχτα οπού γεμίζουν 

-τι τώρα είν’ πιότεροι νεκροί κι απ’ όλους 
της γής τους ζωντανούς, που από τη ζέστα 
της σιωπηλής καρδιάς μας τραβηγμένες, 
καθώς οι πεταλούδες απ’ τις φλόγες 
τραβιώνται των κεριών, να ξεκινάνε 
τις νιώθω από παντού, κι αφήσετέ τις 
να φτάσουνε ως εδώ, ν’ απλοχειρίσουν 

αόρατες σε τούτο το τραπέζι 
του Πλούτωνα, σ’ αυτό τον πυργωμένο 
νεκροδείπνον, ω φίλοι, αφήσετέ τις 

να ρθούν εδώ σ’ εμάς, να γίνουμ’ ένα…. 
Κι απ’ το ποτήρι, φίλε, που μου δίνεις 

γεμάτο ως το στεφάνι και που, αν σκύψω, 
την όψη μου βαθιά του, απ’ άλλο κόσμο 
λογιάζω πως τη βλέπω αντισταλμένη, 
κι απ’ το κρασί που το ’φερες για μένα, 
γιατί είν’ αδρόν, ω φίλε, κ’ ευωδάει 
σαν του Διονύσου το χυμένον αίμα, 
ας μεταλάβουμε όλοι, σάμπως μύστες 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    256                            

 

  

for the divine onslaught . . . And as for the new 
and flaming songs that you now long to hear 

rise to my lips, they too shall come, my friends, 
in their own good time.” Ι spoke, and whether or not they 

had well understood all Ι had sought, 
they sipped of the wine, and Ι, the last of all, 

drank to the last drop also, like the priest 
who drains the holy chalice in the Inner Sanctum; and then 
together as one we softly turned our steps -the candles one 

by one had guttered outtoward the wide-open windows, 
beyond which lay the black enstarred vast ocean of the 

night that on its pulse upheld us ίη our silence… And if no 
one within that darkness spoke, from deep within us the 

same thought and vow rose upward toward the vast gloom 
and the stars: “Hearken, divine protector, Ο Dionysos-

Hades, restrain our hearts now with the brusque black wine 
of your deep pain, guard them and strengthen them and 

keep them still untouched until that hour 
when suddenly your cry, louder than roar 

of earthquake, shall rouse up living and dead together with 
us at once for the divine onslaught!” 

 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

παλιοί, απ’ τ’ Αγαθοδαίμονα το μέγα 
το κύπελλο, βαθιά σιωπή κρατώντας 

ως στη στιγμή ( κι ας μη αργήσει , ω φίλοι) 
που θα μουγκρίσουν άξαφνα οι δυνάμεις 
βαθιάς μας του Θεού, κι ο μυκηθμός του, 
πιο από σεισμού βοή, θα σκώσει αντάμα 
φουσάτο, ζωντανούς και πεθαμένους 
σε θείο γιουρούσι… Κι όσο για τα νέα, 
τα φλογερά που θέλατε τραγούδια 

ν’ ακούσετε από τα χείλη μου, θα ρθούνε 
στην ώρα τους κι αυτά… Έτσ’ είπα· κι όλοι, 

σαν ένιωσαν καλά το τί ζητούσα 
κι απ’ το κρασί γευτήκανε, κι απ’ όλους 
στερνός, σαν ο ιερέας που καταλύει 
το δισκοπότηρο μες στ’ Άδυτο, ήπια 
κ’ εγώ ως την ύστερη τη στάλα, μόνοι 

το βήμα μας τραβήξαμεν αγάλι 
ενώ ένα- ένα τα κεριά, σβηνόνταν 

προς τ’ ανοιχτά παράθυρα όπου, μαύρος 
έναστρος τώρα ωκεανός η νύχτα, 

βουβούς μας πάταε μέσα στον παλμόν της… 
Μα στα σκοτάδια μέσα κι αν κανένας 
πια δε μιλούσε από βαθιά μας όλων 

προς το ζόφο και τ’ άστρα ανηφορούσε 
μιαν ίδια ευχή και γνώμη: «Εισάκουσέ μας! 

Ω Διόνυσε- Άδη, θείε μας παραστάτη· 
συγκράτα τις καρδιές μας με το μαύρο 
του πόνου σου κρασί· δυνάμωνέ τις· 
προφύλαξε τις άγγιχτες για κείνη 

την ώρα π’ ανεπάντεχα η κραυγή σου, 
πιο από σεισμού βοή, θα μας σηκώσει, 
με τους νεκρούς μαζί, στο θείο γιουρούσι! 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    257                            

 

  

[Index] 

Sinopoulos Takis (1917 - 1981) 
 

 
 

 

Sinopoulos Takis was born on 1917 in the Peloponnesean village of Agoulinftsa and 
died on April 21, 1981 in the nearby town of Pirgos Ihas. In 1934 he enrolled in the School of 
Medicine at the University of Athens. He embarked on his career as a pathologist in the 
government's Foundation for Social Security. Attended a symposium of Greek and Spanish 
resistance writers in Barcelona, and the poetry Festival in Cyprus, both in 1979. The author of 
fifteen books of poetry, he has been translated into English, Italian, German and Russian. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο  Τάκης Σινόπουλος γεννήθηκε στο 1917 στο πελοπονησιακό χωριό Αγγουλίνφτσα 
και πέθανε στις 21 Απριλίου 1981 στην κοντινή πόλη του Πύργου Ηλίας. Το 1934 γράφτηκε 
στη ιατρική σχολή στο Πανεπιστημίου της Αθήνας. Άρχισε τη σταδιοδρομία του ως 
παθολόγος στο Ίδρυμα  Κοινωνικής Ασφάλισης. Παρευρέθηκε σε ένα συμπόσιο Ελλήνων και 
Ισπανών αντιστασιακών συγγραφέων στη Βαρκελώνη, και στο φεστιβάλ ποίησης στην 
Κύπρο, και τα δύο το 1979. Είναι συντάκτης δεκαπέντε βιβλίων ποίησης, και έχουν  
μεταφραστεί στα αγγλικά, ιταλικά, γερμανικά και ρωσικά. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    258                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The burning man 

(1957) 

 

Ο καιόμενος 

(1957) 
 

Look, he's entered the fire! said someone from the crowd. 
We, quickly turned our eyes. It was indeed he 

who turned away his face when we spoke to him.  
And now he's burning. But he doesn't call out for help. 
Ι hesitate. Ι think of going there. Of touching him with my 

hand. Ι am by nature a man easily astonished. 
But who is he who in his pride is being consumed? 

Doesn't his mortal body pain him? 
The land here is dark. And difficult. I'm afraid.  

Don't poke into someone else's fire, I've been told. 
Υet there he was, alone, burning. Utterly alone. 

And the more he faded away, the more his face glowed. He 
was turning into a sun. Ιn our time, even as in past times, 
some are found in the fire, and some applaud. The Poet is 

split in two. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

 

Κοιτάχτε μπήκε στη φωτιά! είπε ένας απ’ το πλήθος. 
Γυρίσαμε τα μάτια γρήγορα. Ήταν 

στ' αλήθεια αυτός που απόστρεψε το πρόσωπο όταν 
του μιλήσαμε. Και τώρα καίγεται. Μα δε φωνάζει 

βοήθεια. Διστάζω. Λέω να πάω εκεί. Να τον αγγίξω με 
το χέρι μου. Είμαι από φύση μου φτιαγμένος να 

παραξενεύομαι. Ποιος είναι τούτος που αναλίσκεται 
περήφανος;  Το σώμα του το ανθρώπινο δεν τον πονά; 
Η χώρα εδώ είναι σκοτεινή. Και δύσκολη. Φοβάμαι. 
Ξένη φωτιά μην την ανακατεύεις μου είπαν. Όμως 
εκείνος καίγονταν μονάχος. Καταμόναχος. Κι όσο 
αφανίζονταν τόσο άστραφτε το πρόσωπο. Γινόταν 

ήλιος. Στην εποχή μας όπως και σε περασμένες εποχές  
άλλοι είναι μέσα στη φωτιά κι άλλοι χειροκροτούνε. Ο 

Ποιητής μοιράζεται στα δύο. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    259                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dhionisios Solomos (1798 - 1857) 
 

 
 

 

Solomos Dhionisios was born on Zakinthos but shut his eyes on this life and crossed 
the threshold to eternity on Corfu, beset by bitterness and ill health. The Poet Laureate of 
Greece. In just one month, May of 1823, he wrote Greece's National Anthem, that is "Hymn 
To Liberty" (Imnos Eis Tin Eleftherian) , which consists of 158 trophes.The greatest modern 
Greek poet.. He was the son of Conte Nikolaos Solomos and Angkeliki Nikli. He wrote his 
first poems in Italian, influenced by the people he had met while studying in Italy. When 
Spiridon Trikoupis heard him recite his poems, he advised him to write in Greek. Solomos 
then started studying the language he had learnt from his mother but which he had half 
forgotten. He studied folk songs and started to write verses in Greek. His early lyrical songs 
were fresh, simple, genuinely lyrical and moving, and had idyllic grace. While in his friend 
Stranis headland mansion he heard the guns at Mesolongki and shuddered violently. Tears 
welled up in his eyes and he cried out: "Hold on, poor Mesolongki. Hold on!". With the sound 
of the guns in the background and "with Greece locked in his soul", he sensed the Greatness 
and composed his "Hymn to Liberty". Set to music by his musician friend Nikolaos 
Mandjaros, it was later to become the Greek National Anthem. This poem impressed with its 
wealth of epic imagery, its noble meaning, its imagination, power and warmth. After his death 
everybody expected some great work to be discovered. But all that was found was fragments, 
drafts, notes and a few unconnected lines. The craving for perfection which had tormented 
him all his life had led this worthy lyrical poet to work the same pieces again and again 
without ever finishing them. Yet even so, his work is marked by simple grandeur and superb 
brilliance. 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Διονύσιος Σωλομός γεννήθηκε στη Ζάκυνθο και πέθανε στην Κέρκυρα πικραμένος 
και άρρωστος. Ο δαφνοστεφής ποιητής της Ελλάδας. Σε ένα μόνο μήνα, το Μάιο του 1823, 
έγραψε τον εθνικό ύμνο της Ελλάδας «Ύμνος στην Ελευθερία», ο οποίος αποτελείται από 
158 στροφές. Ο μεγαλύτερος σύγχρονος Έλληνας ποιητής. Ήταν ο γιος του Κόντε Νικολάου 
Σολομού και της Αγγελικής Νικλη. Έγραψε τα πρώτα ποιήματά του στα ιταλικά, 
επηρεαζόμενος από τους ανθρώπους που είχε συναντήσει κατά τη διάρκεια των σπουδών του 
στην Ιταλία. Όταν ο Σπυρίδωνας Τρυκούπης τον άκουσε να απαγγέλλει τα ποιήματά του, τον 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    260                            

 

  

συμβούλεψε να γράψει στα ελληνικά. Ο Σωλομός άρχισε να μελετά τη γλώσσα που είχε 
μάθει από τη μητέρα αλλά την είχε σχεδόν ξεχάσει. Μελέτησε τα παραδισοακά τραγούδια και 
άρχισε να γράφει στίχους στα ελληνικά. Τα πρώτα λυρικά τραγούδια του ήταν φρέσκα, απλά, 
αυθεντικά με κίνηση, και είχαν ειδυλλιακή ατμόσφαιρα. Ενώ βρισκόταν στο μέγαροτου 
φίλου του Στράνη άκουσε τα όπλα στο Μεσσολόγγι και ανατριχίασε. Δάκρυα γέμισαν τα 
μάτια του και φώναξε: «Κρατήσου Μασσολόγγι κρατήσου». Με τον ήχο των όπλων στο 
υπόβαθρο και "με την Ελλάδα βαθιά στην ψυχή του", αισθάνθηκε το μεγαλείο και σύνθεσε 
"τον Ύμνο προς την Ελευθερία". Ο φίλος του Νικόλαος Μαντζάρος έγγραψε τη μουσική, που 
αργότερα έμμελε να γίνει ο Ελληνικός Εθνικός Ύμνος. Αυτό το ποίημα εντυπωσίασε με τον 
πλούτο επικών στοιχείων, τα ευγενή νοήματά του, τη φαντασία, τη δύναμη και τη ζεστασιά. 
Μετά από το θάνατό αναμενόταν η αποκάλυψη μιας εξαιρετικής δουλειάς, πράγμα που δεν 
συνέβη ποτέ. Βρέθηκαν μόνο τμήματα και πρόχειρες σημειώσεις και μερικές ασύνδετες 
γραμμές. Ο πόθος για την τελειότητα που τον είχε βασανίσει όλη του τη ζωή τον έκανε έναν 
άξιο λυρικό ποιητή που προσπαθόντας τα τελειοποιήσει τα ποιήματά του ασχολιώταν με τα 
ίδια πάντα ποιήματα και δεν κατάφερε να τα ελειοποιήσε. Έτσι η δουλειά του χαρακτηρίζεται 
από το απλό μεγαλείο και τη θαυμάσια λαμπρότητα.  

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    261                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The Free Besieged 

(1826) 

 

Οι Ελεύθεροι Πολιορκημένοι 

(1826) 
 

Draft III 
1 

Oh you Mother magnanimous in suffering and glory, 
Even if your children always live in a mystery hidden, 
Ιn meditation and in dream, what has graced my eyes,  

Μy very eyes to see you in this deserted forest, 
Which quite suddenly has wreathed your deathless feet  

(Look) with Easter Palms, the greenery of Palm Sunday! Μy 
ears missed your holy step, my eyes missed your figure, 

Serene you are like the sky enriched by all its beauties, That 
show in many places, in others they are hidden; But, 

Goddess, may Ι hear at last the sound of your voice, At 
once to make it a gift to the Hellenic nation? Οn its black 

rocks and dried grass glory dwells forever. 
 

2 
Deeds, words, and deep thoughts-motionless, Ι stare - 
Μyriads of blossoms, colourful, cover the grassy carpet, 

White, red, blue invite bees of a golden hue. 
Away, one lives among friends, but here, in death's 

presence. Often upon the break of dawn and in the midst of 
day, When the waters turned dark, and the stars grew in 

numbers, Beaches, rocks, and the open sea suddenly leap 
up and quiver. Arabic chargers, English guns, Turkish shots, 

French minds!  
Α great ocean makes war and strikes the tiny cottage; 
* Alas! Ιn a while uncovered the few bosoms remain;  

Thunder are you deathless, have you never known rest? 
That's what a sailor from abroad says bending over the 

prow, All round in fear the islands, they all weep and pray, 
And the cross-shaped domed temple and the most modest 

shrine Amid incense and lit candles listen to their pain. 

 

Σχεδίασμα Γ 
1 

Μητέρα, μεγαλόψυχη στον πόνο και στη δόξα, 
Κι αν στο κρυφό μυστήριο ζουν πάντα τα παιδιά σου Με 

λογισμό και μ' όνειρο, τί χάρ' έχουν τα μάτια, Τα 
μάτια τούτα, να σ' ιδούν μες στο πανέρμο δάσος, Πού 
ξάφνου σου τριγύρισε τ' αθάνατα ποδάρια (Κοίτα) με 
φύλλα της Λαμπρής, με φύλλα του Βαϊώνε! Το θεϊκό σου 

πάτημα δεν άκουσα, δεν είδα, Ατάραχη σαν ουρανός μ' 
όλα τα κάλλη πόχει, Πού μέρη τόσα φαίνονται και μέρη 

'ναι κρυμμένα· Αλλά, Θεά, δεν ημπορώ ν' ακούσω τη 
φωνή σου, Κι' ευθύς εγώ τ' Ελληνικού κόσμου να τη 
χαρίσω; Δόξα 'χ' ή μαύρη πέτρα σου και το ξερό 

χορτάρι. 
 

2 
Έργα και λόγια, στοχασμοί, στέκομαι και κοιτάζω  

Λούλουδα μύρια πούλουδα, πού κρύβουν το χορτάρι, 
Κι' άσπρα, γαλάζια, κόκκινα, καλούν χρυσό μελίσσι. 
Eκείθε με τους αδελφούς, εδώθε με το χάρο. Μες στα 
χαράματα συχνά, και μες στα μεσημέρια, Και σα 

θολώσουν τα νερά, και τ' άστρα σα πληθύνουν, Ξάφνου 
σκιρτούν οι ακρογιαλιές, τα πέλαγα κι' οι βράχοι. «Αραπιάς 
άτι, Γάλλου νους, βόλι Τουρκιάς, τοπ' Άγγλου! Πέλαγο μέγα 
πολεμά, βαρεί το καλυβάκι Κι' αλιά! σε λίγο ξέσκεπα τα 
λίγα στήθη μένουν Αθάνατη 'σαι, πού ποτέ, βροντή, δεν 
ησυχάζεις;» Στην πλώρη, πού σκιρτά, γυρτός, τούτα 'π' ο 
ξένος ναύτης. Δειλιάζουν γύρου τα νησιά, παρακαλούν 
και κλαίνε, Και με λιβάνια δέχεται και φώτα τον καημό 
τους Ο σταυροθόλωτος ναός και το φτωχό ξωκλήσι. Το 
μίσος όμως έβγαλε και κείνο τη φωνή του; «Ψαρού, τ' 

αγκίστρι, π' αφίσες, άλλου να ρίξης άμε». 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    262                            

 

  

Hatred, though, made heard its odious voice also: 
"Fisherwoman, take your hook and go cast elsewhere". 

 
2a 

Often at the break of dawn, and in the midst of day,  
When the waters turn dark, and the stars grow in numbers, 

Beaches, rocks, and the open sea suddenly leap up and 
quiver. Αn old man, who had stuck his life to the fish-hook, 
Cast it away, missed his mark, and pacing he cried: "Arabic 
chargers, English guns, Turkish shots, French minds! Alas, 
a great ocean strikes hard the tiny cottage; In a little while 

uncovered the few bosoms remain; Thunder are you 
deathless, have you never known rest? Oh desolation Ι can 

see, come, let us weep together". 
 

3 
The war has not exhausted them, it has become their life,. . 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . cannot prevent 
The girls from singing songs, the boys from playing games. 

 
4 

Out of clouds ever black, out of the pitch of darkness, 
…………………………………................................... 
But sunlike then, invisible ether of a world in symbol  

The flagpole appears, the brave warriors underneath it,  
And up there, on its highest end, the banner in full glory, 

That speaks and murmurs and its Cross waves in the air In 
all the space around it, the brave wind of valor,The sky 

looked on proudly and all the earth applauded; And every 
voice stirring then toward the light echoed, Most noble 

flowers of love scattering all around;* "Unconquered, rich, 
and beautiful, venerable too, and holy!" 

 

Translated by:  K. Mitsakis  

 
2α 

Μες στα χαράματα συχνά, και μες στα μεσημέρια, Κι' 
όταν θολώσουν τα νερά, κι  όταν πληθύνουν τ  άστρα, 
Ξάφνου σκιρτούν οι ακρογιαλιές, τα πέλαγα κι' οι 

βράχοι.  
Γέρος μακριά, π' απίθωσε στ' αγκίστρι τη ζωή του, 
Το πέταξε, τ' αστόχησε και περιτριγυρνώντας: « 

Αραπιάς άτι, Γάλλου νους, βόλι Τουρκιάς, τοπ' Άγγλου! 
Πέλαγο, μέγ' αλίμονον! βαρεί το καλυβάκι» Σε λίγην 
ώρα ξέσκεπα τα λίγη στήθη μένουν Αθάνατη 'σαι, 
πού, βροντή, ποτέ δεν ησυχάζεις; Πανερημιά της 

γνώρας μου, θέλω μ' εμέ να κλάψης». 
 

3 
Δεν τους βαραίν' ό πόλεμος, άλλ' εγινε ή πνοή τους, 
κι' εμπόδισμα δεν είναι Στές κορασιές να τραγουδούν 

και στα παιδιά να παίζουν. 
 

4  
Από το μαύρο σύγνεφο κι' από τη μαύρη πίσσα, 

……………………………………………………. 
Άλλ '  ήλιος, άλλ '  αόρατος αιθέρας κοσμοφόρος 

Ό στύλος φανερώνεται, με κάτου μαζωμένα 
Τα παλληκάρια τα καλά, μ' απάνου τη σημαία, 

Πού μουρμουρίζει και μιλεί και το Σταυρόν απλώνει 
Παντόγυρα στον όμορφον αέρα της αντρείας, Κι' ο 
ουρανός καμάρωνε, κι' η γη χεροκροτοΰσε κάθε 

φωνή κινούμενη κατά το φως μιλούσε, Κι' εσκόρπα τα 
τρισεύγενα λουλούδια της αγάπης: «Όμορφη, 
πλούσια, κι' άπαρτη, και σεβαστή, κι' αγία!» 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    263                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Hymn To Liberty 

 (extract) 

(1822) 

Ύμνος εις την Ελευθερίαν 
(απόσπασμα) 

(1822) 

 

1 
Ι know you by the sharp blade 

of your terrifying sword, 
Ι know you by the form you made 

taking the earth as victor lord. 
 

2 
Sprung from Grecian bones scattered 

hallowed on every vale, 
with your old valor unshattered,  

Liberty, hail to you, hail! 
 

15 
Υes, but your sons, your offspring 

now fight with all their breath, 
and unceasingly are seeking 

either victory or death. 
 

155 
“Images of the Most High 

can't you hear this cry of pain?  
Centuries have passed it by 

but its echo does remain. 
 

157 
What then? Will you allow us 

to struggle and become freed? 
Or will you disavow us 

due to politicians' need? 
 

158 

 
1 

Σε γνωρίζω από την κόψη 
του σπαθιού την τρομερή, 
Σε γνωρίζω από την όψη  
Πού με βία μετράει τη γη. 

 
2 

Απ' τα κόκαλα βγαλμένη 
Των Ελλήνων τα ιερά, 

Και σαν πρώτα ανδρειωμένη,  
Χαίρε, ω χαίρε, , Ελευθεριά! 

 
15 

Ναί· άλλά τώρα αντιπαλεύει  
Κάθε τέκνο σου με ορμή,  
Πού ακατάπαυστα γυρεύει  

Ή τη νίκη ή τη θανή. 
 

155 
Δεν ακούτε, εσείς εικόνες  
Του Θεού, τέτοια φωνή;  
Τώρα πέρασαν αιώνες  
Και δεν έπαυσε στιγμή. 

 
157 

Τι θα κάμετε; θ' αφήστε 
Να αποκτήσωμεν εμείς 

Λευθερίαν, ή θα την λύστε 
'Εξ αιτίας Πολιτικής; 

 
158 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    264                            

 

  

If this is then your decision 
here, before you stands the Cross!  

Crush it, Monarchs, to oblivion,  
crush it, help to wreak our loss.” 

 
Translated by: Hellenic Chronicle  

Τούτο άνίσως μελετάτε,  
Ιδού, εμπρός σας τον Σταυρό· 

Βασιλείς! ελατέ, ελατέ, 
Και κτυπήσετε κι' εδώ. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    265                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Epigram to Psara 

(1824) 

 

Η Καταστροφή των Ψαρών 

(1824) 
 

Οn Psara's blackened, charred stone 
Glory silently walks all alone 

meditating her sons' noble deeds, 
and wears a wreath on her hair 

made of such few scattered weeds 
on the desolate earth left to spare 

 
Translated by: Hellenic Chronicle  

 
Στων Ψαρών την ολόμαυρη ράχη Περπατώντας η Δόξα 

μονάχη  
Μελετά τα λαμπρά παλικαριά  
Και στην κόμη στεφάνι φορεί  
Γεναμένο από λίγα χορτάρια  

Πού είχαν μείνει στην έρημη γη. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    266                            

 

  

[Index] 

Stasinopoulos Michael (1917 - 2002) 
 

 
 

 

 

Stasinopoulos Michael was born in Kalamata, Peloponnese, in 1903 and died in 
Athens on 2002. He received his degree in law  from the University of Athens in 1924 and he 
has had a great career as jurist. In 1974 he became President of the Republic. He has written 
poems, novels, essays and has translated French poetry into Greek. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Μιχάλης Στασινόπουλος γεννήθηκε στη Καλαμάτα το 1903 και πέθανε στην Αθήνα 
στο 2002. Έλαβε το πτυχίο νομικής από το Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών το 1924 και είχε μια 
εκαιρετική πορεία ως δικηγόρος. Το 1974 έγινε Πρόεδρος της Δημοκρατίας. Έχει γράψει  
ποιήματα, μυθιστορήματα, νουβέλες και έχει μεταφράσει γαλλική ποίηση στα ελληνικά. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 

  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    267                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The knight of chess 

 

Το άλογο του σκακιού 
 

Alert, calm, and silent, lost in his thoughts, the Knight  
onto back or white spaces readily jumps and waits.  

While deep thoughts fix him onto squares, black or white, 
the sad and speechless game's turns he sees and 

calculates. A move, another move, a thought, another 
thought. Round him wooden enemies and their devious 

goals. What can he think of, devise, consider with care? 
The narrow squares heavily have taxed his thought and his 
life turned monotonous with a familiar air. A move, another 

move; a thought - the same thought! He counts and reckons 
silently the game's every move, but well he knows that 

destiny his life did ordain to charge his wooden enemies 
and among them to fall, onto black or white squares, bravely, 

beside his sovereign. 

Translated by:  Byron Raizis   

 

Προσεχτικό κι’ ασάλευτο, βουβό κι αφαιρεμένο  
στο μαύρο ή στ ' άσπρο, υπάκουο πηδάει και 

περιμένει, Στο μαύρο ή στ' άσπρο, ασάλευτο, βαθιά 
συλλογισμένο, το σκυθρωπό κι αμίλητο παιγνίδι 

λογαριάζει. Μια κίνηση, άλλη κίνηση, μια σκέψη, κι 
άλλη σκέψη. Τριγύρω οι ξύλινοι του εχθροί κι οι 

επίβουλοι σκοποί τους.  
Τί να σκεφτεί, να σοφιστεί και τί να λογαριάσει;  
Μες στα στενά τετράγωνα εσώθηκεν ή σκέψη  
κι έγινε πια μονότονη και γνώριμη ή ζωή του. 

Μια κίνηση, άλλη κίνηση, μια σκέψη - η ίδια σκέψη! 
Το σιωπηλό παιγνίδι του μετρά και λογαριάζει, μα 
όμως το ξέρει πώς γραφτό σ' όλη είναι τη ζωή του, να 
ορμά μέσα στους ξύλινους εχθρούς του, και να πέφτει, 
στο μαύρο ή στ' άσπρο, ηρωικά, κοντά στο βασιλιά 

του. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    268                            

 

  

[Index] 

Stoyannidhis Yioryos (1912 - 1994) 
 

 
 

 

Stoyannidhis Yioryos was born on 1912 in Xanthus, Thrace, when the town was still 
in Turkish hands. The following year the family moved to Kavala. Until he finally settled in 
Thessaloniki in 1970. Since both words and form, he feels, have undergone an ethical 
corruption, he has tried to restore them to their freshness under the given conditions of 
contemporary times, and to delineate a state of loneliness in an equal corruption  of human 
relations. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

Ο Γιώργος Στογιανίδης γεννήθηκε το 1912 στη Ξάνθη, όταν ήταν ακόμα η πόλη στα 
τουρκικά χέρια. Την επόμενη χρονιά η οικογένεια του μετακόμισε στην Καβάλα. Τελικά 
εγκαταστάθηκε στη Θεσσαλονίκη το 1970. Αισθανόταν ότι είχε υποστεί μια ηθική διάβρωση, 
προσπάθεσε δε να αποκαταστήσει τη φρεσκάδα των λέξεων με όρους των σύγχρονων ετών 
και να σκιαγραφήσει τη κατάσταση της μοναξιάς σε μια κατά αναλογία διάβρωση των 
ανθρώπινων σχέσεων. 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    269                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

The fragments 

 

Τα θρύψαλα 
 

With a clumsy move, as I was shaving, 
 I shattered the mirror spraying myself with 

 Tiny splinters of glass. I am no longer alone, reflected by a 
myriad particles. 

How long, though, will I bear this? 
At times, I think that I am followed 

by my dismembered limbs 
and that frightens me. 

It reminds me of those men in dark glasses 
who watch your every move. 

No, I prefer myself intact. 

Translated by:  University of Oklahoma, Booksa 
Abroad, 49, No. 3 (Summer, 1975), 588   

 

Με μια αδέξια κίνηση έσπασα τον 
 καθρέφτη που ξυριζόμουνγεμίζοντας το κορμί 

 μου μικρά μικρά γυάλινα θρύψαλα. 
Δεν είμαι πια μόνος, καθρεφτισμένος σ' άπειρα μόρια 

χαίρομαι τ' οδυνηρό μου κομμάτιασμα. 
Όμως πόσο θ' αντέξω; Κάποτε, θαρώ πώς με 
παρακολουθούν τα διαμελισμένα μου μέλη 

κι αυτό με τρομάζει. 
Μου θυμίζει εκείνους με τα μαύρα γυαλιά 

πού ελέγχουν την κάθε σου κίνηση. 
Όχι, προτιμώ τον ακέραιο εαυτό μου. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    270                            

 

  

[Index] 

Frangopoulos Theofilos (1923 - 1998) 
 

 
 

 

Frangopoulos Theofilos was born in Athens on 1923 and died there on 1998. He 
obtained his law degree from the University of Athiens in 1947. During the Occupation he 
took part in the resistance movement, serving with the right-wing National Armed Forces of 
General Zervas in Epiros. He has taught modern Greek literature in several colleges in 
Athens, in the University of Bochum in West Germany, at Boston University and at Queens 
College in the United States. He has written several plays and ten books of poetry, including 
his collected poems in two volumes. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets]  

 

 

O Θεόφιλος Φραγκόπουλος γεννήθηκε στην Αθήνα το 1923 και πέθανε το 1998. 
Έλαβε το πτυχίο νομικής από το Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών το 1947. Κατά τη διάρκεια τηε 
κατοχής συμμετείχε στην αντίστασης, υπηρέτησε στις δεξιές δυνάμεις του στρατηγού Ζέρβα 
στην Ήπειρο. Έχει διδάξει τη νεοελληνική λογοτεχνία σε διάφορα κολλέγια στην Αθήνα, στο 
Πανεπιστήμιο του Μπόχουμ στη Δυτική Γερμανία, στο πανεπιστήμιο της Βοστώνης και στο 
Queens College στις Ηνωμένες Πολιτείες. Έχει γράψει διάφορα έργα και δέκα βιβλία 
ποίησης, συμπεριλαμβανομένων των ποιητικών συλλογών σε δύο τόμους. 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    271                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Christ in revolt 

(1956) 

 

Ο επαναστατημένος Χριστός 

(1956) 
 
I 

In the evenings, at the hour when the windows 
 Awaken and the lights of expectation 

emerge on the ridges of houses 
in the working-class districts, 

the lights of the tired father who from his hands 
washes the toil and cunning of day 

and enters the room with its sleeping children 
and the trembling smile of their mother; 

at that hour, gliding away from his gilded churches 
that have kept him imprisoned, 

Christ descends with a cigarette over his ear, 
his fingernails filthy with machine oil, 

then looks on these houses here of the poor, 
and smiles. 

 
II 

These districts constantly revolt. Angry mothers 
 beat their dry breasts as their courageous sons 

 light their cigarettes or follow those who play checkers with 
a gun between their legs 

in a corner of the street barricade. 
These districts are not beautiful.  

Revolution is not beautiful.  And when they win, 
 they too become repulsive like all the others. 

And yet when on the last night of their insurrection  
fires flare up everywhere  and the fighters see that their end  
is here waiting for them  with the next onslaught of law and 

order  which the loudspeakers are already announcing;  
when the last glance is shared  

together with their last bullets  and they mark off their 
positions,  decimated revolutionaries without a tomorrow 

 

Ι 
Τα βράδια, την ώρα πού ξυπνάνε τα παράθυρα 

και βγαίνουν στις κορφές των σπιτιών 
τα φώτα της προσμονής, σε συνοικίες λαϊκές, 

του κουρασμένου πατέρα πού πλένει άπ' τα χέρια του 
τον κάματο και την πονηριά της μέρας 

και μπαίνει στο δωμάτιο με τα κοιμισμένα παιδιά 
και το τρεμάμενο χαμόγελο της μάνας τους, 

κείνη την ώρα, γλιστρώντας από τις χρυσωμένες του 
εκκλησιές πού τον βαστούσαν φυλακισμένο, 
κατεβαίνει ο Χριστός με ένα τσιγάρο στο αυτί, 

με τραγιάσκα ψαρά και νύχια γεμάτα λάδι της μηχανής, 
και κοίτα τα σπίτια τούτων εδώ των 

φτωχώνχαμογελώντας. 

 
II 

Οι συνοικίες συχνά επαναστατούνε. 
Θυμωμένες μανάδες χτυπάνε τα στεγνά στήθια τους και 

τα παλικάρια ανάβουν τσιγάρο 
ή παρακολουθούν αυτούς πού παίζουν τρίλιζα 

με τ' όπλο ανάμεσα στα δυο τους πόδια 
σε μια γωνιά του οδοφράγματος. 
Δεν είναι όμορφες οι συνοικίες. 
Δεν είναι όμορφη ή επανάσταση. 

Κι όταν νικάνε, γίνονται και τούτοι αντιπαθείς 
σαν όλους τους άλλους. Όμως όταν, την τελευταία 
νύχτα της ανυποταγής, ανάψουν ολούθε οι φωτιές  

και δουν οι μαχητές πώς το τέρμα τους  
είναι εδώ, και τους προσμένει  

με την επόμενη έφοδο της εννόμου τάξεως  
πού αναγγέλλουν κιόλας τα μεγάφωνα,  
σαν μοιραστεί κι ή τελευταία ματιά  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    272                            

 

  

then from the darkness a shabily dressed man slips out  
armed with an old blunderbuss  

and takes his place among them, silently,  
and begins to shoot with them at his crucifiers  

Jesus Christ, son of Joseph and Mary, carpenter,  
class of 1944. 

Translated by:  Kimon Friar   

μαζί με τα λιγοστά τους βόλια κι επισημάνουν τις θέσεις 
τους, αποδεκατισμένοι επαναστάτες χωρίς αύριο τότε 

μέσ' άπ' το σκοτάδι ξεγλιστράει φτωχοντυμένος, 
οπλισμένος μ' ένα μακρύκανο 

και παίρνει τη θέση ανάμεσα τους, σιωπηλά, 
κι αρχίζει να ντουφεκάει μαζί τους τους σταυρωτήδες 
του ο Ιησούς Χριστός, του Ιωσήφ και της Μαρίας, 

ξυλουργός, κλάσεως 1944. 

 

 

[Index] [Greek Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    273                            

 

  

[Index] 

Italian Literature 
 

Overview 
 

During the first half of the nineteenth century the public life in Italy was characterized 
by many riots and the first independence war.  

The reasons of this patriotic fervour were the craving of: setting the country free from 
foreign powers and reuniting all the different regions, setting up a political power across the 
country based on a constitution in opposition to the absolutism prevailing in some regions of 
Italy, overcome all the economical and commercial hurdles, which were the consequence of a 
political fragmentation. 

The intellectuals such as Mazzini and Foscolo and some patriotic personalities such as 
Ciro Menotti and Santorre di Santarosa were all animated by a deep conviction that Italy 
already had its own cultural and religious identity. Therefore they all fought hard to achieve a 
national unity. 

The literary and artistic atmosphere is characterized by the German Romanticism 
strong influence and all the works of this period are pervaded by emotional bursts, often 
patriotic and amorous at the same time. 

Love for his own Country nourishes, together with the insurrectionary tumults, a 
renewed interest for his national identity and for the country history. In the poems and novels  
we can find a new religious feeling that, in the preceding century had been surpassed by the 
Illuminist Rationalism. 

During the second half of the nineteen century the national unification moved on with 
the second and the third independence war. 

Cavour’s diplomatic skills and the courage shown by personalities such as Pisacane 
and Garibaldi, followed by volunteers and professional soldiers, succeeded in creating the 
United Kingdom of Italy with Vittorio Emanuele the second as the reigning king. 

However the newly born Kingdom was supposed to overcome several social 
problems, such as: reach a break-even point in the Kingdom assets, overcome the deep 
cultural and economical differences across all the regions, eradicate the local criminal 
organisation crippling the social and economical stability. 

Over the last years of the nineteenth century and during the first years of the twentieth 
century the social and economical problems will worsen, causing the migration of large part 
of the population towards North and South America. 

The seriousness of the economical and social problems which afflicted Italy caused, 
automatically, some deep changes in the artistic and literary fields as well: the poetry of the 
Romantic models was overcome by the descriptive prose of the Verism, which was more 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    274                            

 

  

devoted to the people’s life, to their suffering , to the hard work in the countryside and in the 
mines. 

During the first years of the twentieth century Italy will be affected by nationalistic 
and imperialistic ideas, very diffused all over Europe, which will lead Italy to the first world 
war. The victory which will follow will be a fictitious victory, due to the high number of 
casualties. 

The social and economical upheaval that will later take place, will be affected by a 
political turmoil and frequent riots which will be the breeding ground for a dictatorial 
government: the Mussolini Government.  

His imperialistic ideas will lead Italy to participate to the Second World War sharing 
the same responsibilities as the Hitler Government. 

In the literary field, the period suffers from the degeneration of the nineteen-century 
patriotism, which was animated of a great love for his own Country and able to spread 
through other Countries (in fact a lot of Italian patriots went to fight and die for other 
Countries freedom, such as Greece). 

In the twentieth- century this elevated feeling becomes nationalism and nourishes 
rhetoric literary forms, often linked to the political power. In these forms, the Futurism stands 
out , due to its exaltation of an extreme modernity, identified in machines, cars, speediness, in 
the contempt for the past and the instigation to war. 

Once the Second World War was over, this time with a defeat for Italy, the Italian, 
under the leadership of charismatic political personalities such as De Gasperi, will be able to 
achieve a new moral, economical and social balance. 

The literary and artistic works, in particular the cinematography, completely 
abandoned every rhetoric and triumphalistic behaviours and devoted themselves to an 
scrupulous, often bitter, consideration about a reality influenced by a lot of political mistakes 
Italy then will start a new journey which will lead the country to be one of the founder of the 
European Union.  

 

[Index]  

 

Introduzione 
 

Durante la prima metà dell’Ottocento la vita pubblica italiana fu scossa da molti moti 
insurrezionali e dalla prima Guerra d’indipendenza.  

I fini di tanto fervore patriottico erano i seguenti: liberare il paese dal potere straniero 
ed unificare tutte le diverse regioni, istituire un potere politico basato su una costituzione per 
tutto il paese in luogo dell’assolutismo ancora regnante in alcune regioni d’Italia, superare 
tutte le barriere economiche e commerciali, conseguenza della frammentazione politica. 

Gli intellettuali, come Mazzini e Foscolo, ed i patrioti, come Ciro Menotti e Santorre 
di Santarosa, erano tutti animati dalla profonda convinzione che l’Italia avesse già una sua 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    275                            

 

  

propria identità culturale e religiosa ed erano pronti a lottare fino alla morte per conseguire 
anche l’unità nazionale. 

L’atmosfera artistica e letteraria è caratterizzata da una forte influenza del 
Romanticismo tedesco e le opere di questo periodo sono tutte pervase da slanci sentimentali, 
sovente patriottici ed amorosi al tempo stesso. 

L’amore per il proprio paese alimenta, insieme ai moti insurrezionali, anche un 
rinnovato interesse per la propria identità nazionale e per la sua storia. Rinasce nei romanzi e 
nelle poesie anche il sentimento religioso, che nel secolo precedente era stato sovrastato dal 
razionalismo illuministico. 

Durante la seconda metà dell’Ottocento il processo di unificazione nazionale proseguì 
con la seconda e la terza Guerra d’indipendenza. 

L’abilità diplomatica di Cavour ed il coraggio dimostrato in combattimento da uomini 
come Pisacane e Garibaldi, seguiti da volontari o soldati, portarono alla formazione del Regno 
Unito d’Italia con Vittorio Emanuele II come sovrano. 

Tuttavia lo stato appena costituito doveva risolvere diversi problemi sociali, in 
particolare i seguenti: raggiungere il pareggio del bilancio, superare le profonde differenze 
culturali ed economiche che intercorrevano tra le diverse regioni, sradicare le associazioni 
criminali locali, che minavano la stabilità economica e sociale. 

Durante gli ultimi anni dell’Ottocento ed i primi del Novecento vi fu un 
peggioramento dei problemi economici e sociali che causò l’emigrazione di gran parte delle 
popolazioni più povere verso l’America settentrionale e meridionale. 

La gravità dei problemi economici e sociali che affliggevano l’Italia provocò, 
inevitabilmente, profondi cambiamenti anche in ambito artistico e letterario: alla poesia degli 
ideali romantici seguì la prosa descrittiva del Verismo, attenta alla vita del popolo, alle sue 
sofferenze, al duro lavoro dei campi e delle miniere.  

Fin dagli inizi del Novecento l’Italia fu presa dagli ideali nazionalistici ed 
imperialistici che si erano già diffusi e profondamente radicati in Europa e che condussero il 
paese a combattere la prima Guerra mondiale. La vittoria che seguirà sarà tale solo di nome, a 
causa dell’elevatissimo prezzo umano pagato.  

Ne seguirono gravi agitazioni sociali ed economiche che turbarono profondamente il 
paese e costituirono il terreno favorevole per l’affermarsi di un governo forte: la dittatura di 
Mussolini. 

Le sue aspirazioni imperialistiche porteranno l’Italia a partecipare alla seconda Guerra 
mondiale, condividendo gli errori e gli orrori di Hitler. 

In ambito letterario questo periodo risente della degenerazione del patriottismo 
ottocentesco, che era stato un amore per la propria patria capace di estendersi anche ad altri 
paesi (molti patrioti italiani sono andati a combattere e morire anche perla libertà di altri 
paesi, come la Grecia). 

Nel Novecento questo nobile sentimento, si trasforma in nazionalismo ed alimenta 
forme letterarie retoriche, spesso legate al potere politico. Si distinse il Futurismo per la sua 
esaltazione di una modernità esasperata, identificata con le macchine e la velocità, unita al 
disprezzo del passato ed all’incitamento alla guerra. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    276                            

 

  

Terminata la seconda Guerra mondiale, questa volta con la sconfitta per l’Italia, il 
popolo italiano, sotto la guida di uomini di altissimo valore, come Alcide De Gasperi, troverà 
la forza di attuare una rinascita morale, sociale ed economica. 

Le opera letterarie ed artistiche, in particolare la cinematografia, abbandonarono 
completamente ogni atteggiamenti retorico e trionfalistico e si dedicarono ad un’attenta, e 
spesso amara, riflessione sulla realtà dovuta a tanti errori politici.  

L’Italia, quindi, inizierà un nuovo percorso, che la porterà ad essere uno dei paesi fondatori 
dell’Unione Europea.  

 

[Index]  
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    277                            

 

  

[Index] 

Italian Poets
 

Alvaro Corrado

Buzzati Dino

Cardarelli Vincenzo

Carducci Giosuè

Cattaneo Carlo  

D’Annunzio Gabriele

De Amicis Edmondo  

De Marchi Emilio

Deledda Grazia

Foscolo Ugo  

Giusti Giuseppe  

Gozzano Guido

Leopardi Giacomo  

Luzi Mario

Mameli Goffredo

Manzoni Alessandro  

Marinetti Filippo Tommaso

Mazzini Giuseppe  

Montale Eugenio

Negri Ada

Nievo Ippolito  

Palazzeschi Aldo

Pascoli Giovanni

Pavese Cesare

Penna Sandro

Pisacane Carlo

Quasimodo Salvatore

Rodari Gianni

Ruffini Giovanni  

Saba Umberto

Sereni Vittorio

Silone Ignazio

Solmi Sergio

Tomasi di Lampedusa Giuseppe  

Tozzi Federigo

Trilussa

Ungaretti Giuseppe

Verga Giovanni  

Vittorini Elio

 

Italian Painters 
 

Banti Cristiano

Bechi Luigi

Boldini Giovanni

Borrani Odoardo

Cabianca Vincenzo

Fattori Giovanni

Lega Silvestro

Signorini Telemaco

Zandomeneghi Federico

 

Italian Sculptors 
 

Canova Antonio  

 

[Index]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    278                            

 

  

[Index] 

Corrado Alvaro (1895 - 1956) 
 

 
 

He was born in San Luca, a little village in the Aspromonte mountains, the heart of 
Calabria region. He received his basic education by his father who made him aware of the 
primitive nature of his land and its inhabitants, mainly countrymen and shepherds. He began, 
in his early youth, to write poems and short stories.  

He was an heated interventionist and, called for military service, he fought bravely 
and hurt his arms. In this period he wrote Poesie Grigioverdi, the result of his war experience. 
He wrote for the most important newspaper of his times: in Bologna, where he got married 
and had a son, he wrote for the Resto del Carlino; in Milano for the Corriere della sera and in 
Rome for La Stampa. He was a strict critic and opponent of the Fascist dictatorship and for 
this he had to take refuge in Berlin, where he took part to the German cultural life, also 
devoting himself to translation activities.  

His masterpiece is the novel Gente di Aspromonte, dedicated to his native hard and 
primitive land, which was remembered by the author with deep homesickness, either for the 
faraway childhood or for a world which was inevitably changing. He died in 1956, consoled 
by his brother Massimo, a priest. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a San Luca, piccolo paesino sui monti dell’Aspromonte, nel cuore della 
Calabria. Ricevette la sua prima istruzione dal padre, che gli fece conoscere la natura 
primitiva della sua terra e dei suoi abitanti, per lo più contadini e pastori. Cominciò ancora 
giovanissimo a scrivere poesie e racconti. 

Acceso interventista, fu chiamato alle armi, combatté con valore e fu ferito 
gravemente alle braccia. Scrisse le Poesie grigioverdi, frutto di questa sua esperienza di 
guerra.Collaborò con i più importanti quotidiani del tempo: a Bologna, dove si sposò ed ebbe 
un figlio, scrisse per il Resto del Carlino; a Milano scrisse per il Corriere della sera ed a Roma 
per La Stampa. Severo critico ed oppositore del regime fascista, si rifugiò per un certo 
periodo a Berlino, dove partecipò alla vita culturale tedesca, dedicandosi anche ad attività di 
traduttore. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    279                            

 

  

La sua opera più famosa è Gente di Aspromonte, dedicata alla sua terra nativa, aspra e 
primitiva, ma ricordata con profonda nostalgia per l’infanzia lontana e per un mondo che 
stava ormai scomparendo. Si spense nel 1956, confortato dalle cure del fratello sacerdote, 
Don Massimo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    280                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Awareness 

(1917) 

Consapevolezza 

(1917) 
 

This poem is an hymn to awareness, that awareness which 
the author longs for. Even if awareness is never complete 

and not everybody can reach it, it is still the condition 
humans should try to experience. 

According to the poet,  the  awareness is in fact is able to 
transform a simple information in a  thinking  activity and  

only through the awareness  it is possible to fully  benefit  of 
the opportunity to pass from a simple reading  of the reality  

to an effective self-advertisement.  
The poem seems, at first reading, addresses to the beloved  
woman: in fact the poet says he trembles when “she” is next 

to him, he shudders when “she” talks, he suffers when  
“she”  is absent; only in the last sentence  of the poem the 
word “awareness” is pronounced and all the sense of the 

poem changes. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

 
Tremo, 

se lei mi è vicina 
sorrido, 

al solo guardarla, 
sussulto, 

se sento la sua voce, 
ma soffro  

se lei non c'è,  
se la cerco e non la trovo, 

se la chiamo e non risponde 
non dico oggi il nome di questo accadimento 

perchè c'e' una parola detta troppe volte 
soprattutto da coloro che non sanno cos'è 

io oggi la chiamerò 
magia 

ma che mistero è mai questo ? 
che razionalità c'è in essa ? 

nessuna, 
la sola parte di razionalità che riesco a trovare 

ma che sempre avrà una parte in ombra 
è 

la consapevolezza. 
 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    281                            

 

  

[Index] 

Dino Buzzati (1906 - 1972) 
 

 
 

He was born in Belluno in 1906 in a middle-class family. He carried out humanistic 
studies, graduated in Law and after that he started writing for the Corriere della Sera.  

He was a journalist and committed himself to this activity with passion and devotion 
(during the second world war he was a navy correspondent and took part in the battle of 
Matapan) and was always highly regarded by a big number of readers.  

He wrote many novels among which there are Barnabo delle montagne, in 1933, Il 
segreto del bosco vecchio, in 1935, the collection Il crollo della Baliverna, in 1954, and Il 
colombre, in 1966. However, his greatest success was the romance Il deserto dei Tartari in 
1940.  

All his pieces of work are pervaded with the perception of the sense of living as a vain 
waiting for a great mysterious event which should give a sense to the years passing by but 
which never takes place.  

The background of his writing is the mountain, the desert or the seaside. They are 
symbols of the human loneliness and of his vain never-ending tension to some limit which 
can reassure the humans, such as a horizon which always remains unreachable.  

Although it is quite different, the city is also perceived as a labyrinth in which the man 
gets lost and his expectations are never satisfied. In his last years he expressed these issues in 
his paintings too. He died in 1972. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nato a Belluno nel 1906 da una famiglia borghese, compì gli studi classici, si laureò in 
Giurisprudenza e, subito dopo, iniziò a scrivere per il Corriere della Sera. 

Egli svolse per tutta la vita questa attività di giornalista con grande passione ed 
impegno(durante la seconda guerra mondiale fu anche corrispondente della flotta e partecipò 
alla battaglia di Matapan), sempre corrisposto dall’ammirazione di un vasto pubblico di 
lettori. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    282                            

 

  

Scrisse molti racconti (fra cui Barnabo delle montagne, nel933, Il segreto del bosco 
vecchio, nel 1935, e le raccolte Il crollo della Baliverna, del 1954, e Il colombre, del 1966), 
ma il suo più grande successo l’ottenne nel 1940 con il romanzo Il deserto dei Tartari. 

Le sue opere sono tutte pervase dal senso della vita come l’attesa vana di un grande 
evento misterioso, che dovrebbe dare senso allo scorrere inesorabile degli anni, ma che non 
accade mai. 

Lo sfondo del suo narrare è spesso la montagna, il deserto od il mare: simboli della 
solitudine dell’uomo e del suo vano ed eterno tendere verso un limite rassicurante, un con-
fine, che resta sempre irraggiungibile. 

Anche la città, pur tanto diversa, è sentita come un labirinto nel quale l’uomo si perde 
ed ogni attesa è destinata ad essere delusa. 

Nei suoi ultimi anni espresse queste tematiche anche con l’attività di pittore. Si spense 
nel 1972. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    283                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Song shaped like… 

(1941) 

Canzonetta in forma di 

(1941) 
 

This is a poem written by the author for the woman he 
beloved. The structure of its lines represents the shape of a 
bird which hides some love words which the bird has to take 

and disclose to the beloved one. The truth is that the bird 
might never arrive at destination. 

In effect the bird is lazy, wastes its time, limps and  lingers, 
it even falls asleep. The poet  urges it, scolds it, whips it  but 

all is useless The poet, in his poetry considers some  
themes such as distress, fear of death, magic, mistery, the 
research of the Absolute, the desperate expectations and 

the ineluctability of destiny. The great protagonist of 
Buzzati’s poetry is actually the destiny, almighty and  

inscrutable, often derisory; in this poem we can feel exactly 
this mood, in particular  in the last sentences when the poet 

understands the uselessness of his struggle. 

 

 
 

 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
una 

stanca 
disillusa 

folaga che  batte 
l'ali sull'acquitrino 

del 41 dicembre lunga 
lunga notte tu dicevi che 

saresti venuta quel giorno 
o quell'altro, giuravi e invece! con la mia 

Così le ho date da portare a questo solita ingenuità! 
capriccioso uccello certe parole per lei che sono però 

poco leggibili perché nascoste sotto le piume. Ma 
il volatile pianta grane, il volatile si attarda, zoppica qua 

e là, si posa,si addormenta perfino e ronfa. 
delle maledette Io lo sgrido, lo supplico, lo frusto 

grane  lo frusto sulle ali,forte, forte 
nella speranza si riscuota 
e corra e si precipiti. Ma 

é stanco, dice che no 
che no. Tutto inutile 
amore mio. Adieu. 

(Un'ala lunga 
l'altra più 

corta 
sì). 

 
da Poesie, ed.Neri Pozza, Venezia 

 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    284                            

 

  

[Index] 

Vincenzo Cardarelli (1887 - 1959) 
 

 
 

He was born in Tarquinia in 1887 but, still very young, he moved to Rome where he 
carried on some humble trades before beginning to write for some prestigious literary 
reviews, such as the Voce and the Marzocco.  

He was one of the founders, and later, the director of the Ronda, a literary review 
proposing a poetry and an art prose which had to be the result of an accurate study and refined 
sensitivity.  

He wrote poems and novels full of lyrical tones, such as Viaggi nel tempo, in 1916, 
and Il sole a picco, in 1929. The most recurring theme in his works, is the passing of the time, 
with some leopardian echoes. He passed away in Rome in 1959. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Tarquinia nel 1887, ma si trasferì giovanissimo a Roma, dove esercitò umili 
mestieri prima di cominciare a collaborare con prestigiose riviste letterarie, come la Voce ed il 
Marzocco. 

Fu tra i fondatori e, successivamente, il direttore della Ronda, rivista letteraria che 
proponeva una poesia ed una prosa d’arte che fossero frutto di studio accurato e di raffinata 
sensibilità. 

Scrisse poesie e prose di intonazione lirica, come Viaggi nel tempo, del 1916, ed Il 
sole a picco, del 1929. Il tema che ricorre più frequentemente nei suoi scritti è quello dello 
scorrere del tempo, con echi, talvolta, leopardiani. Si spense a Roma nel 1959. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    285                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Seagulls 

(1929) 

Gabbiani 

(1929) 
 

This poem expresses the author’s sensations and emotions. 
He is like the seagulls, they fly everywhere and never stop 

anywhere. The author doesn’t know whether or not they 
have a home and where and whether or not they find peace 
and where. They long for the quiet and peaceful horizons of 
the sea. However, the author cannot find peace anywhere 

and his destiny is to survive the storms of life. 
His poetry is a kind of  descriptive  and linear poetry,  either 
when he  describes landscapes or animals, or when he talks 
about people or feelings: the use of the language is always  

chatty but deep and  impetuous at the same time.  
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Non so dove i gabbiani abbiano il nido, 

ove trovino pace. 
Io son come loro 
in perpetuo volo. 
La vita la sfioro 

com'essi l'acqua ad acciuffare il cibo. 
E come forse anch'essi amo la quiete, 

la gran quiete marina, 
ma il mio destino è vivere 

balenando in burrasca. 

 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    286                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giosuè Carducci (1835 - 1907) 
 

 
 

Great poet and man of letters, he was born in Val di Castello, a small town in the 
northwest corner of Tuscany, near Lucca in 1835, in a family pervaded by passionate patriotic 
ideals. His father, formerly affiliated to the Carbonarism, was a doctor who practised his 
career in the Tuscan Maremma, a land that Carducci will remember all life long with a deep 
yearning and of which he will talk in the poem “Davanti a San Guido”.  

For a long period, from 1860 to 1904, he has been teaching at the University of 
Bologna, where he had, among his students, the famous poet Giovanni Pascoli. He was able 
to combine his poetical and teaching careers with the literary critic activity. In 1906, one year 
before his death, he was awarded the Nobel prize in Literature. 

During his youth he had kept the republican ideals of his family but at the height of 
maturity he drew near to monarchy, becoming its official poet because of the nationalistic 
contents of many of his compositions.  

He didn’t loved neither the Romanticism, too much sentimental in his opinion nor the 
Realism, too much poor in heroical bursts; on the contrary he preferred the glorious historical 
recollections, using a mock-classical and high language.  

Despite this, the poet sometimes indulged in poems inspired by the familiar affection, 
as “Pianto antico”, dedicated to his child, dead at a tender age.  

Having a materialistic vision of the reality, the poet perceived death as the loss of the 
vital force and the deprivation of the light, that is the same vision of the Latin authors he 
beloved.  

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Grande poeta e letterato, nacque a Valdicastello, nei pressi di Lucca, nel 1835, da una 
famiglia di ferventi ideali patriottici. Il padre, che era stato affiliato alla Carboneria, era un 
medico ed esercitava la sua professione nella Maremma toscana, terra che Carducci ricorderà 
sempre con profonda nostalgia, come nella poesia “Davanti a S. Guido”. 

Per lunghi anni, dal 1860 al 1904, insegnò all’Università di Bologna, dove ebbe fra i 
suoi allievi anche Giovanni Pascoli. Seppe unire alla sua attività di poeta e di insegnante 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    287                            

 

  

anche quella di critico letterario e nel 1906, l’anno precedente a quello della sua morte, fu 
insignito del premio Nobel per la Letteratura. 

Durante gli anni della giovinezza aveva conservato gli ideali repubblicani della sua 
famiglia, ma nella maturità si avvicinò alla monarchia e ne divenne il poeta ufficiale per il 
contenuto nazionalistico di molti suoi componimenti. 

Non amò il Romanticismo eccessivamente sentimentale, né il Verismo, troppo povero 
di slanci eroici, e predilesse rievocazioni storiche di momenti gloriosi della storia italiana, 
usando un linguaggio classicheggiante ed elevato. 

Tuttavia si abbandona anch’egli, talvolta, a poesie ispirate agli affetti familiari, come 
“Pianto antico”, dedicata al suo bambino, morto in tenera età. 

Egli, avendo una concezione materialistica della realtà, considera la morte come la 
perdita della forza vitale e la privazione della luce, proprio come la vedevano quegli autori 
latini che tanto ha amato.  

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    288                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

San Martino 

(1883) 

San Martino 

(1883) 
 

In this poem, very well known and loved in Italy, the poet 
describes the typical atmosphere of autumn: the nature 

which takes the characters of cold months and the men who 
rejoice with the new wine smell and the heath of the 

fireplace on which the roasting-spit turns. 
They are feelings of domestic life and country life from 

which the mind sometimes flies away, as birds which fly in 
the sky. 

The cheerfulness of the village contrasts with the gloom   of 
the autumn atmosphere,  shrouded in fog and captured  at 

sunset “in the reddish clouds”. 
In the first strophe  there is a description of  the landscape,  
with fog which covers the bare and withered trees on  the 
hills; in the second one the attention is switched  to the 

village, its strrets, the smell of wine which cheers up 
people’s  souls; in the third strophe the attention is devoted 

to the hearth with the fireplace and the roasting-spit, the 
hunter on the doorstep, looking at the clouds and the birds 

which fly away,  just  as the men thoughts, despite the 
cheerfulness of wine  and the heat of the situation. It’s a 

poem which describes in few verses, a whole world. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
"La nebbia agli irti colli 

Piovigginando sale, 
E sotto il maestrale 

urla e biancheggia il mare; 
Ma per le vie del borgo 

Dal ribollir de' tini 
Va l'aspro odor de i vini 

L'anime a rallegrar. 
Gira su' ceppi accesi 

Lo spiedo scoppiettando: 
Sta il cacciator fischiando 

Su l'uscio a rimirar 
Tra le rossastre nubi 
Stormi d'uccelli neri, 
Com'esuli pensieri, 

Nel vespero migrar." 

 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    289                            

 

  

[Index] 

Carlo Cattaneo (1801 – 1869) 
 

 
 

Illustrious exponent of the Italian Risorgimento, Carlo Cattaneo was born in 1801 in 
Milan, the city where the French culture of the Enlightenment was spreading fast.  

Strongly influenced by the encyclopedism, typical of this movement , Cattaneo 
devoted himself to several disciplines and his works range over Literature, Legislation, 
Sciences, Economy.  

His masterpiece, anyway, is not due to a single work, but to a prestigious review, the 
“Politecnico” that, from 1839 to 1845 offered the readers, thousands of extensive and rigorous 
dissertations. 

In particular, it is still modern his conception of economy , in which he asserted  the 
importance of the human factor in economy, claiming that “…once closed the ideas circle, it 
is also closed the circle of richness…”. 

He was a man of culture, but he also was a soldier, able to fight valorously against the 
Austrian troops during the so called “Five Days of Milan” in which the town resisted to the 
Austrian storm. 

Obliged to the exile by the return of the Austrian in Milan, he escaped in Switzerland 
where he died in 1869.  

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Illustre rappresentante del Risorgimento italiano, nacque nel 1801 a Milano, città nella 
quale si era diffusa la cultura illuministica di origine francese. 

Fortemente influenzato dall’enciclopedismo proprio di questo movimento, Cattaneo 
volle dedicarsi a numerose discipline ed i suoi scritti spaziano dalla Letteratura al Diritto, 
dalle Scienze all’Economia. 

Il suo capolavoro, tuttavia, non è costituito da una singola opera, ma dal “Politecnico”, 
prestigiosa rivista che dal 1839 al 1845 offrì trattazioni esemplari per ampiezza di interessi e 
rigore di metodo. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    290                            

 

  

Ancora oggi, in particolare, è attuale la sua concezione economica, per l’importanza 
che vi attribuiva all’elemento umano, sostenendo che ”..chiuso il circolo delle idee, resta 
chiuso il circolo delle ricchezze”. 

Oltre ad esser uno uomo di cultura, egli seppe anche combattere strenuamente contro 
le truppe austriache durante le Cinque Giornate di Milano. 

Costretto all’esilio dal ritorno degli Austriaci, si rifugiò in Svizzera, dove morì nel 
1869.  

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    291                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

From “About the revolt of Milan in 
1848 and the subsequent war ” 
Chapt. I – Precedents until 1847 

(1849) 

Da “Dell’insurrezione di Milano nel 
1848 e della successiva guerra” 

Cap. I - Antecendenti fino al 1847 

(1849) 
 

With these words, inspired by deep patriotic feelings, the 
author tells the events of the glorious “5 days of Milan”, in 

which the whole Milanese population, in particular students 
and workers, rose up against the Austrian tyranny. The 

author took part to the revolt, bravely fighting on the 
barricades and contributing to the final victory. It was during 
these battles that it was sung the Mameli anthem for the first 

time. This work is one of the most important texts of the 
Italian Risorgimento. The author wrote it during the exile, 

after the fai8lure of the  uprisings of the 1848. Besides the 
description of the Five Days of Milan, it is a  disillusioned 
analysis of the general political situation, in favour of the 

population and his struggle for  freedom  and not only as a 
liberation from Austrians sought  by the king Carlo Alberto. 
The last  objective, for Cattaneo, was the construction of a 

modern and democratic State in the framework of the 
“United States of Europe”, the only opportunity for assuring 
freedom. This work, far-sighted and intense, comes back 

today to the reader with all its surprising clarity and sense. 
 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
“All’uopo di chiarire da quali sentimenti movesse la 

nostra insurrezione, conviene adombrare alcuni fatti dei 
quali fu naturale e semplice conseguenza.  

Nel 1814 la Francia era solamente vinta; l’Italia rimase 
conquistata. L’occupazione straniera in Francia era solo 
un caso fortuito e transitorio; in Italia venne perpetuata 
dal Congresso di Vienna; ed oggidì ancora si decanta 
come un diritto dell’Austria e come una condizione alla 

pace d’Europa...”  
Una fazione retrograda sopravissuta a tutte le glorie di 

Napoleone, accolse come una buona ventura l'invasione 
austriaca; vide nelle armi straniere la salvezza d'ogni 
vieto pregiudicio; vi sperò perfino uno strumento di 

dominio. Ignara delle alte ragioni di Stato, immemore 
della dignità nazionale, ella sognò di tenersi gli Austriaci 

a modo d'una guardia di svizzeri. Vedendo i loro 
battaglioni invadere le sue città, plaudiva dicendo: ecco i 

nostri soldati; essi ci salveranno dalla rivoluzione. 
Codesta fazione pagò prodigamente d'essere protetta 

dall'esercito imperiale. Abbandonò senza riserva 
all'Austria il pubblico patrimonio; non patteggiò misura 
alcuna all'esorbitanza delle imposte. Il denaro nostro fu 

trasportato con annua rapina a Vienna; il tesoro 
imperiale potè ingoiarci a quest'ora due mila milioni. 

Così lasciavasi svenare la patria dallo straniero, purchè 
difendesse la causa dell'ignoranza. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    292                            

 

  

 [Index] 

Gabriele D’Annunzio (1863 - 1938) 
 

 
 

Gabriele D’Annunzio was born in Pescara in 1863 in a family that became rich thanks 
to a rich inheritance. He was attending the prestigious senior high school specializing in 
classical education “Cicognini ”in Prato, a town near Florence, when he still young started his 
literary activity by publishing his first poetries collection called Primo Vere. We can catch in 
those poetries an influence of Carducci, but they were already inspired by new sensual 
naturalism.  

Since his youth he showed a big passion for both old and contemporary literatures 
together with a keen desire to move in fashionable circles, by enjoying sophisticated and 
transgressed life, away from any mediocrity form.  

He lived in Rome from 1881 to 1997, where he shaped his image of artist living his 
life as a Master Piece, rich of adventures and big loves.  

His relationship with the actress Eleonora Duse was famous and they moved to Villa 
Capponcina next to Florence in 1897. He lived in a refined excessive luxury, so that in 1910 
he was obliged to move to France in order to elude his creditors.  

During the period he spent in Rome he worked and wrote for magazines and 
newspapers and he published a collection of poetries called Canto Novo and two collection of 
tales called Terra Vergine and Novelle della Pescara.  

Then, by the novels called Il Piacere and Le Vergini delle Rocce he became one of the 
European Decadents by sharing his ideals and aestheticism and supermanism according to his 
own interpretation of the Nietzsche’s thought, such as the exaltation of the instinctive vitality 
and the intellectual superiority. These were the peculiarities of the exceptional man, the one 
able to rise over the mass of people, whose he despaired the miserable and poor daily nature.  

The friendship with Eleonara Duse leaded him to write successful theatrical works like 
La Figlia di Iorio in 1903.  

During the period spent in Florence he wrote the Alcyone, a poetic diary of a summer 
spent in Tuscany which includes La Pioggia nel Pineto a poetry gifted with an extraordinary 
musicality, by which the poet sings his deep unity with the nature.  

At the beginning of the first world war he involved himself with a fired interventionist 
policy and he bravely fought looking for fantastic and risky attempts, as La Beffa di Buccari, 
Il Volo su Vienna and the occupation of the Fiume town together with a team of volunteers.  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    293                            

 

  

During the above attempts he was seriously injured on one eye and in this black period 
he wrote the contemplative prose called Notturno.  

At the beginning he was supporter of B. Mussolini, but then he distanced himself from 
him, and he retired at the Vittoriale a villa on the Garda Lake, where he lived until his death 
in 1938.  

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 
 

Nacque a Pescara nel 1863, da una famiglia divenuta ricca grazie ad un’eredità. Fu 
iscritto al prestigioso Liceo Cicognini di Prato, nei pressi di Firenze, dove iniziò, ancora 
giovanissimo, la sua attività letteraria, pubblicando la raccolta di poesie Primo Vere. Vi si 
avverte una certa influenza di Carducci, ma già con spunti di un nuovo naturalismo sensuale. 

Fin dai suoi anni giovanili mostrò una grande passione per le letterature antiche e 
contemporanee, unitamente al vivo desiderio di frequentare il bel mondo, godendo di 
raffinatezze e trasgressioni, lontano da ogni forma di mediocrità. 

Visse a Roma dal 1881 al 1897, costruendovi la sua immagine di artista che vive la 
sua vita come se fosse un’opera d’arte, ricca di avventure e grandi amori. 

Famosa fu la lunga amicizia con l’attrice Eleonora Duse, con la quale, nel 1897, si 
trasferì nei pressi di Firenze, nella villa La Capponcina, vivendo circondato da un lusso 
raffinato ed eccessivo, tanto che nel1910 dovette trasferirsi in Francia, per sfuggire ai 
creditori. 

Durante il periodo romano aveva collaborato con giornali e riviste e pubblicato una 
raccolta di poesie, Canto Novo, e due raccolte di novelle, Terra Vergine e Novelle della 
Pescara. 

Successivamente, con i romanzi Il piacere e Le vergini delle rocce entrò a far parte del 
Decadentismo europeo, condividendone gli ideali dell’Estetismo e del Superomismo, secondo 
una sua personale interpretazione di alcuni aspetti del pensiero di Nietzsche, quali 
l’esaltazione della vitalità istintiva e della superiorità intellettuale, caratteristiche dell’uomo 
d’eccezione, capace di elevarsi sulle masse, disprezzandone la misera quotidianità. 

L’amicizia con Eleonora Duse lo indusse a scrivere anche opere teatrali che ebbero 
grande successo, come la Figlia di Iorio del 1903. 

Durante il periodo fiorentino scrisse l’ Alcyone, diario poetico di un’estate trascorsa in 
Toscana, di cui fa parte La pioggia nel pineto, poesia dotata di una straordinaria musicalità 
con la quale il poeta canta la fusione con la natura. 

Allo scoppio della guerra mondiale si impegnò in un’accesa propaganda interventista, 
combattendo poi coraggiosamente, anche alla ricerca di imprese spettacolari e rischiose, come 
la beffa di Buccari, il volo su Vienna e l’occupazione, con un corpo di volontari, della città di 
Fiume. 

In tali imprese fu ferito gravemente ad un occhio e, in questo periodo buio, scrisse la 
bella prosa meditativa Notturno.  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    294                            

 

  

Inizialmente sostenitore di Mussolini, ne prese poi le distanze, ritirandosi a vivere nel 
Vittoriale, villa sul lago di Garda, fino alla morte, avvenuta nel 1938.  

 

 [Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    295                            

 

  

[Index] 
 

The rain in the pine forest  

(from “Alcyone” 1903) 

La pioggia nel pineto 

(da “Alcyone” 1903) 
 

Through these verses the poet relives and conveys us the 
emotions he lived during a walk in the rain with his loved 

one, amid the grass, the shrubs and the trees of a 
pinewood. They feel in the nature the palpitations of their 

own lives, to such an extent that it is created a kind of 
mysterious fusion between the vegetation and their bodies, 

while their thoughts open up towards wonderful dreams. 
In the poem the themes of metamorphosis, love,  music as 
evocator of the poetic words are strictly linked and mixed 

up. The poet invites Hermione to be silent and listen to the 
music of rain. He is attentive in order to catch the different 
gradations and the variuos modulations that the rain drops 

on the leaves.  Also the cicadas with their song and the 
frogs with their dull and hoarse cry take part to this concerto 
and the sounds get lost in the shadows of a faraway place 

(the sentence “who knows where” wants to create an 
impression of remote and faboulous distance). 

The symphony of the sounds leads the man and his woman 
in a dimension of dream, in which the metamorphosis rites 
takes place. At first the protagonists merge with the wood, 
then Hermione is likened to  the nature elements (the face 
as a leave, the hair as genistas); she becomes more and 

more a wood nymph, their heart is like a peach, their eyes 
like sources, the teeth like unripe almonds. 

Another of the main themes of the poem is the naturism 
(defined in italian “Panismo” from Pan, greek god of  nature, 
a sort of satyr with beard, horns and goat legs), that is the 

identification with the vegetal life. The “panismo” of 
D’Annunzio tends to the humanization of nature; in the 

nature the individual expands his senses and converges, at 
first phisically and then spiritually. 

 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Taci. Su le soglie 
del bosco non odo 

parole che dici 
umane; ma odo 
parole più nuove 

che parlano gocciole e foglie 
lontane. 

Ascolta. Piove 
dalle nuvole sparse. 
Piove su le tamerici 
salmastre ed arse, 

piove sui pini 
scagliosi ed irti, 
piove sui mirti 

divini, 
su le ginestre fulgenti 

di fiori accolti, 
sui ginestri folti 

di coccole aulenti, 
piove sui nostri volti 

silvani, 
piove sulle nostre mani 

ignude, 
sui nostri vestimenti 

leggieri, 
su i freschi pensieri 
che l'anima schiude  

novella, 
su la favola bella 

che ieri 
l'illuse, che oggi m'illude, 

o Ermione 
Odi? La pioggia cade 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    296                            

 

  

su la solitaria  
verdura 

con un crepitio che dura 
e varia nell'aria 

secondo le fronde 
più rade, men rade. 
Ascolta. Risponde 
al pianto il canto 

delle cicale 
che il pianto australe 

non impaura, 
nè il ciel cinerino. 

E il pino 
ha un suono, e il mirto 

altro suono, e il ginepro 
altro ancora, stromenti 

diversi 
sotto innumerevoli dita. 

E immersi 
noi siam nello spirto 

silvestre, 
d'arborea vita viventi; 

e il tuo volto ebro 
è molle di pioggia 
come un foglia, 
e le tue chiome 
auliscono come 

le chiare ginestre, 
o creatura terrestre 

che hai nome 
Ermione. 

Ascolta, ascolta. L'accordo 
delle aeree cicale 

a poco a poco 
più sordo 

si fa sotto il pianto 
che cresce; 

ma un canto vi si mesce 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    297                            

 

  

più roco 
che di laggiù sale, 

dall'umida ombra remota. 
più sordo e più fioco 
s'allenta, si spegne. 

Sola una nota 
ancora trema, si spegne, 
risorge, treme, si spegne. 
Non s'ode voce del mare. 
Or s'ode su tutta la fronda 

crosciare 
l'argentea pioggia 

che monda, 
il croscio che varia 
secondo la fronda 

più folta, men folta. 
Ascolta. 

La figlia dell'aria 
è muta; ma la figlia 

del limo lontane, 
la rana, 

canta nell'ombra più fonda, 
chi sa dove, chi sa dove! 
E piove su le tue ciglia, 

Ermione.  
Piove su le tue ciglia nere 

sì che par tu pianga 
ma di piacere; non bianca 

ma quasi fatta virente, 
par da scorza tu esca. 

E tutta la vita è in noi fresca 
aulente, 

il cuor nel petto è come pesca 
intatta, 

tra le palpebre gli occhi 
son come polle tra l'erbe, 

i denti negli alveoli 
son come mandorle acerbe. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    298                            

 

  

E andiam di fratta in fratta, 
or congiunti or disciolti 
(e il verde vigor rude 
ci allaccia i malleoli 
c'intrica i ginocchi) 

chi sa dove, chi sa dove! 
E piove su i nostri volti 

silvani, 
piove sulle nostre mani 

ignude, 
sui nostri vestimenti 

leggieri, 
su i freschi pensieri 
che l'anima schiude  

novella, 
su la favola bella 

che ieri 
m'illuse, che oggi t'illude, 

o Ermione. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    299                            

 

  

[Index] 

Edmondo De Amicis (1846 - 1908) 
 

 
 

Born in Oneglia in 1846, he has been a writer who has deeply influenced  the ethical 
and civil ideas of Italians.  

He came round the Socialism and was able to express the philanthropic ideals of the 
enlightened middle class of the end of the 800. In this period Italy, after having achieved the 
independence and being under the Savoias, was trying to solve its grave social problems 
caused by the beginning of the industrialization process.  

His masterpiece, translated all over the world, is the novel “Cuore” (“Heart” in 
English) which is dedicated to the education of the young pupils (who are also the ideal 
characters of the tales constituting the writing) and animated by a deep and true ethical and 
patriotic strain. De Amicis died in Bordighera in 1908. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nato ad Oneglia nel 1846 e morto a Bordighera nel 1908, è stato uno scrittore che ha 
molto influenzato la formazione morale e civile degli Italiani. 

Aderì al Socialismo e seppe esprimere gli ideali filantropici della borghesia illuminata 
della fine dell’Ottocento. 

La sua opera più famosa, tradotta in tutto il mondo, è il libro “Cuore”: è dedicato alla 
educazione dei giovani scolari (che sono i personaggi ideali dei diversi racconti che 
costituiscono l’opera) ed animato da una profonda e sincera tensione morale e patriottica. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    300                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

From “Heart”- The first day  
of school (1886) 

Da Cuore - Il primo giorno  
di scuola (1886) 

 
In this selected passage from his most famous novel 

(Heart), the author, who often sets his stories in the school 
world, describes the sensations and feelings experienced 

the first day of the school year. 
The protagonist in fact, while walking to the school, misses 

the holidays in the countryside, the games, the open 
landscapes. Once arrived at school he is stunned because 

of the noise and disappointed for having a new teacher. The 
new teacher, in fact, seems to be more severe and the 
protagonist is afraid to have to bear a school year full of 

heavy obligations. 
Nevertheless, at the end of the first lesson, he finds solace 
in his mother’s loving words, who has promised to help him 

to study. 
Cuore is the most famous novel for children in Italy. It was 
issued on October 1886, the first day of school in Italy. Its 

success was immense: over a few months, it had been 
printed in 40 Italian editions and translated into tens of 

languages. At least until the fifties, the novel has been an 
inevitable text in the education of generations of youth. With 
this  novel the writer tried a national unification undertaking 

through a literary work, by researching an accessible 
common language for everybody, easily assimilable but, at 
the same time, a work able of taking on it the ideal charge, 
necessary for the foundation of a new nation. An operation 
that, thanks to its extraordinary outcome, can be compared  

with the role the television had, in Italy, after the second 
world war. 

The book is constructed as a diary, composed by enrico a 
young student of the elementary school; the child narrates 
his days and, at the end of each month, the diary reports a 
short story (9 in total) dictated by the teacher, in order to 
instruct and edify the students. Main characters of these 

 
Oggi primo giorno di scuola. Passarono come un sogno 

quei tre mesi di vacanza in campagna! Mia madre mi 
condusse questa mattina alla Sezione Baretti a farmi 

inscrivere per la terza elementare: io pensavo alla 
campagna e andavo di mala voglia. Tutte le strade 

brulicavano di ragazzi; le due botteghe di libraio erano 
affollate di padri e di madri che compravano zaini, 

cartelle e quaderni, e davanti alla scuola s'accalcava 
tanta gente che il bidello e la guardia civica duravan 
fatica a tenere sgombra la porta. Vicino alla porta, mi 

sentii toccare una spalla: era il mio maestro della 
seconda, sempre allegro, coi suoi capelli rossi arruffati, 

che mi disse: - Dunque, Enrico, siamo separati per 
sempre? - Io lo sapevo bene; eppure mi fecero pena 
quelle parole. Entrammo a stento. Signore, signori, 

donne del popolo, operai, ufficiali, nonne, serve, tutti coi 
ragazzi per una mano e i libretti di promozione nell'altra, 

empivan la stanza d'entrata e le scale, facendo un 
ronzio che pareva d'entrare in un teatro. Lo rividi con 
piacere quel grande camerone a terreno, con le porte 
delle sette classi, dove passai per tre anni quasi tutti i 
giorni. C'era folla, le maestre andavano e venivano. La 

mia maestra della prima superiore mi salutò di sulla 
porta della classe e mi disse: - Enrico, tu vai al piano di 

sopra, quest'anno; non ti vedrò nemmen più passare! - e 
mi guardò con tristezza. Il Direttore aveva intorno delle 
donne tutte affannate perché non c'era più posto per i 

loro figliuoli, e mi parve ch'egli avesse la barba un poco 
più bianca che l'anno passato. Trovai dei ragazzi 

cresciuti, ingrassati. Al pian terreno, dove s'eran già 
fatte le ripartizioni, c'erano dei bambini delle prime 
inferiori che non volevano entrare nella classe e 
s'impuntavano come somarelli, bisognava che li 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    301                            

 

  

short stories are always children, each time coming from 
different Italian Regions, always called  to rare acts of  self-
denial, heroism, defense of the native land or of the family. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

tirassero dentro a forza; e alcuni scappavano dai banchi; 
altri, al veder andar via i parenti, si mettevano a 

piangere, e questi dovevan tornare indietro a consolarli 
o a ripigliarseli, e le maestre si disperavano. Il mio 
piccolo fratello fu messo nella classe della maestra 

Delcati; io dal maestro Perboni, su al primo piano. Alle 
dieci eravamo tutti in classe: cinquantaquattro: appena 
quindici o sedici dei miei compagni della seconda, fra i 
quali Derossi, quello che ha sempre il primo premio. Mi 
parve così piccola e triste la scuola pensando ai boschi, 
alle montagne dove passai l'estate! Anche ripensavo al 
mio maestro di seconda, così buono, che rideva sempre 
con noi, e piccolo, che pareva un nostro compagno, e mi 

rincresceva di non vederlo più là, coi suoi capelli rossi 
arruffati. Il nostro maestro è alto, senza barba coi capelli 

grigi e lunghi, e ha una ruga diritta sulla fronte; ha la 
voce grossa, e ci guarda tutti fisso, l'un dopo l'altro, 

come per leggerci dentro; e non ride mai. Io dicevo tra 
me: - Ecco il primo giorno. Ancora nove mesi. Quanti 
lavori, quanti esami mensili, quante fatiche! - Avevo 

proprio bisogno di trovar mia madre all'uscita e corsi a 
baciarle la mano. Essa mi disse: - Coraggio Enrico! 

Studieremo insieme. - E tornai a casa contento. Ma non 
ho più il mio maestro, con quel sorriso buono e allegro, 

e non mi par più bella come prima la scuola. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    302                            

 

  

[Index] 

Emilio De Marchi (1851 - 1901) 
 

 
 

 

The writer is deeply linked to the town of Milan, where he was born in 1851 and 
where  he has been living almost all life long. He is one of the most important exponents of 
the Lombard Realism.  

This literary movement, growing up in the second half of the nineteenth century, was 
progressively replacing the Romanticism ideals with the economical categories of the second 
industrial revolution, bringing the authors to replace the lyrical expression of their feelings 
with the description of the reality.  

De Marchi wrote, in 1890, the novel “Demetrio Pianelli”, in which he doesn’t narrate 
any heroic or exceptional facts, but only little and simple daily events with an intentionally 
modest style in order to participate to the described reality.  

The tone of his works is sometimes melancholic because of the emotional sufferings 
and the social difficulties the characters have to face. Besides the writing activity, the author 
devoted himself to the teaching; he also had some administrative assignments by the 
municipality of Milan, the town where he died in 1901. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

È uno scrittore profondamente legato alla città di Milano, dove nacque nel 1851 e 
dove trascorse quasi tutta la sua vita, divenendo il rappresentante del Verismo lombardo. 

Questo movimento letterario si andava affermando nella seconda metà dell’Ottocento, 
quando a molti degli ideali del Romanticismo si sono sostituite le categorie economiche della 
Seconda Rivoluzione Industriale e gli scrittori hanno sostituito l’espressione lirica dei loro 
sentimenti con la descrizione della realtà. 

De Marchi ha scritto, nel 1890, il romanzo “Demetrio Pianelli”, nel quale non sono 
narrate vicende eroiche od eccezionali, bensì piccoli e semplici fatti quotidiani, con uno stile 
volutamente modesto per aderire alla realtà descritta. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    303                            

 

  

Il tono delle pagine di questa e delle altre opere dello stesso autore è talvolta 
malinconico, per le sofferenze sentimentali e le difficoltà sociali che i personaggi devono 
affrontare. Oltre all’attività di scrittore, egli si dedicò anche all’insegnamento ed ebbe 
incarichi amministrativi per il Municipio di Milano, città dove morì nel 1901. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    304                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Boredom 

(1899) 

Ora di tedio 

(1899) 
 
In these verses the poet describes, using sometimes sad 

words, his inner attitude: the boredom. 
It is not a pain, which would allow him to feel alive, but a 

sense of existential void which seems to deprive meaning to 
life. His lack of hope represents the vision of future like a 

desert sea. The poem belongs to the collection “Old poems 
and new ones” in which the author, even though sometimes 

is attracted by the refinement of the “new style” never 
deserts the  style forms and procedures of the old times; in 

fact he respect only a precept: the good writing, the 
necessity of writing when there is the good inspiration.  
The collection is divided in three parts, each one with a 

suggestive title. The first one is entitled “The secret 
thoughts”, the second one “The wandering images”, the third 
one “The innermost senses”. The reader, in the poems can 

follow the unconfortable feelings and the  continous 
struggling of the modern spirit, facing questions, problems, 
misteries which sound insoluble and incomprehensible; in 
the poet’s work, the reader can experience heart beat  of a 

man who has passed by the life troubles and is able to 
transmit his emotion, deep but not daunting, not hopeless, 

not desperate. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Non il piangere, no, tedio è il sentire 

  Morire in mezzo al core la speranza: 
 Non il morir, ma il non poter morire, 

  Quando non più che la memoria avanza. 
 Non l'onda umana, non la furibonda 
  Tempesta al marinar reca tormento: 

 Ma il deserto del mar senza una sponda, 
  Ma il legno infranto e non un fil di vento. 

 Non dir tu che la man stendi per via 
  Che il chieder pane è una miseria infame, 

 È più miseria, è più malinconia 
  Viver tra i vivi e non aver più fame. 

 Arder nel fuoco e far dal fuoco uscire 
  Una fiammante idea, gemer in croce 

 E dalla croce il mondo benedire 
  Come Gesù colla morente voce, 

 
 Questa che il cor distrugge od affatica 

  Od altra ancora più nemica sorte 
 Ti salvi dal languir misera ortica, 

  Non morto, no, ma segno della morte. 
 Pur ch'io senta il mio cor, fategli intorno 

  Di spine una corona e pur ch'io viva 
 Mi basta il breve luccicar d'un giorno 
  Di grande incendio scintilluzza viva. 

 
 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    305                            

 

  

[Index] 

Grazia Deledda (1871 - 1936) 
 

 
 

 

Grazia Deledda was born in Nuoro, Sardinia, in 1871, in a family of landowners. She 
achieved her literary education as an autodidact, encouraged by her father who dabbled in 
dialectal poetry and used to organize cultural debates.  

In 1900, thanks to her marriage with a government employee, she moved to Rome 
where she became more and more famous and well know; in fact, in 1926, she won the Nobel 
prize for literature. This award contributed to make her works well known all over the world.  

Her writings are characterized by strong themes, such as hidden or troubled passions, 
great loves and great sorrows, lived in the background of the Sardinian land, rich in contrasts 
as a lot of her characters.  

Her best novels are Elias Portolu, written in 1900, Canne al vento written in 1913 and 
Cosima, an autobiographical novel which was published after the author’s death. Grazia 
Deledda, in fact, had passed away in 1936 in Rome. The leading characters of her works are 
characterized either by some Verism features such as the hardness of life, or by some 
Decadentism ones, with reference to their delicate sensitivity. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Nuoro nel 1871, da una famiglia di piccoli proprietari terrieri. Compì la sua 
formazione letteraria da autodidatta, favorita dal padre che si dilettava di poesia dialettale ed 
organizzava dibattiti culturali. 

Nel 1900, grazie al suo matrimonio con un funzionario dello stato, si trasferì a Roma, 
dove divenne ben presto famosa, fino ad ottenere, nel 1926, il Premio Nobel per la 
Letteratura. Questo riconoscimento contribuì a far conoscere le sue opere in tutto il mondo. 

I suoi scritti sono caratterizzati da tematiche forti, quali passioni nascoste o 
tormentate, grandi amori e grandi dolori, vissuti sullo sfondo della terra sarda, ricca di 
contrasti come molti suoi personaggi. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    306                            

 

  

I suoi romanzi più belli sono Elias Portolu, del 1900, Canne al vento, del 1913, e 
Cosima, romanzo autobiografico che fu pubblicato postumo nel 1937. Infatti la scrittrice si 
era spenta a Roma nel 1936. I protagonisti delle sue opere sono caratterizzati sia da tratti tipici 
del Verismo, quali la durezza della loro vita, sia da tratti propri del Decadentismo, quali la 
loro delicata sensibilità. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    307                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

While the East Wind Blows 

(1905) 

Mentre soffia il levante 

(1905) 
 

According to an ancient Sardinian legend, the bodies of 
those who are born on Christmas Eve will never dissolve 

into dust but are preserved until the end of time. 
Now this was the natural subject of conversation in the 

house of the rich peasant Diddinu Frau, called Zio (uncle) 
Diddinu. His daughter's fiancé, Predu Tasca, raised the 

objection: 
"But for what purpose? To what use is our body to us when 

we are dead?" 
"Well," answered the peasant, "isn't it a divine grace not to 
be reduced to ashes? And when we arrive at the universal 

judgment, would it not be wonderful to find one's body 
intact?" 

"Pooh, would it really be that great?" Predu replied, looking 
very skeptical. 

"Listen, my son-in-law," the peasant exclaimed, "the topic is 
a good one. Shall we sing about it tonight?" 

We ought to be aware that Uncle Diddinu was an 
extemporaneous poet, like his father had been and his 

grandfather, too. Joyfully he seized every opportunity to 
propose a contest of extemporaneous song, especially 

whenever there were poets around who were less skillful 
than himself. 

"Oh," Maria Franzisca observed, making herself as graceful 
as she could since her beloved looked at her, "the argument 

is a little gloomy." 
"Shut up! You can go to bed!" the father shouted rudely at 

her. 
Although he was a poet, Diddinu was a wild and brutal man 

who dealt severely with his family, in particular with his 
daughters. His family respected him, but they all feared him. 
In the presence of her father, Maria Franzisca would hardly 

 
Un’antica leggenda sarda afferma che il corpo degli 

uomini nati nella vigilia di Natale non si dissolverà mai 
fino alla fine dei secoli. 

Si parlava appunto di ciò in casa di zio Diddinu Frau, 
ricco contadino, e Predu Tasca, il fidanzato della 

figliuola di zio Diddinu, domandava: - Ed a che serve 
ciò? Che possiamo farcene del corpo, dopo che siamo 

morti? 
-Ebbene, - rispose il contadino, - non è una grazia divina 

non essere ridotti in cenere? E quando arriverà il 
giudizio universale, non sarà una cosa bellissima 

ritrovare intatto il proprio corpo? 
- Poh, chi lo sa? – disse Predu con fare scettico.  

- Senti, genero mio, - esclamò il contadino, - 
l’argomento è buono; vogliamo stanotte cantarlo? 

Bisogna sapere che zio Diddinu è un poeta 
estemporaneo, come lo erano suo padre e suo nonno; 
egli coglie con gioia tutte le occasioni per proporre una 
gara di canto estemporaneo a poeti meno abili di lui. 
- Oh, - osservò Maria Franzisca, facendo la graziosa 
perché il fidanzato la osservava, l’argomento è poco 

allegro. 
- Tu, stai zitta! Tu andrai a letto! – gridò il padre con 

voce rude. Benché poeta, egli era un uomo rozzo, che 
trattava la famiglia, specialmente le figliuole, con 

severità quasi selvaggia. E la famiglia lo rispettava e lo 
temeva. In presenza del padre Maria Franzisca non 

osava neppure sedersi accanto al suo Predu (del resto 
la moda del paese voleva che i fidanzati stessero a 

rispettosa distanza) e si contentava di civettar con lui da 
lontano, affascinandolo con le mosse della bella 

persona fiorente entro il pittoresco vestito di scarlatto o 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    308                            

 

  

have dared to sit down close to her dear Predu. According 
to the custom of engaged couples, she kept a distance from 

her fiancé, only to charm him more, enticing him with the 
lovely movements of her body, veiled in the fleecy scarlet 

vest embroidered with flowers, and the blazes of her 
turquoise-green, almond-shaped eyes. 

 
From the collection “I giuochi della vita” (1905) 

Translated by: Anders Hallengren 

 

 

di orbace, e soprattutto con gli sguardi degli ardenti 
occhi d’un turchino verdognolo, grandi come due 

mandorle mature. 
 

Dalla raccolta “I giuochi della vita” (1905) 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    309                            

 

  

[Index] 

Ugo Foscolo (1778 - 1827) 
 

 
 

 

Ugo Foscolo was born in Zante in 1778, a little island in the Ionian sea which 
belonged to the Venetian Republic, he spent there his first youth and he always missed it (as 
in his “Sonetti”), when he left it for ever. He moved to Venice, where he joined the liberal 
ideals; he believed in them all life long , fighting for their achievement and facing poverty and 
the exile (he in fact died in London in 1827; in this town where at first he had great social 
success and later, having spent his earnings, he was forced to give lessons and write articles 
and for several years). 

His struggle for the liberation of the Lombardo-Veneto region from the Habsburgs 
domination will be one of the major subjects of his works. 

He had been living in Milan, Pavia, Boulogne and Florence: in this last town, rich in 
works of arts, he devoted himself to the composition of a poem dedicated to the “Graces”, in 
which he summons up the classical beauty and the civilizing mission of the Art. 

Part of his literary production is in fact linked to the Neo-Classicism, a cultural 
movement contemporary to the Napoleonic Empire, which exalts and imitates the formal 
perfection of the classical works, either Greek or Roman . 

In some other important works, instead, the Romanticism inspiration prevails and it is 
particularly bonded to the themes of Love, Homeland and Death, which is not seen as the end 
of all but as a reality which can nourish the memories of he beloved people and the wish to 
follow their examples (in 1807 Foscolo wrote the poem I sepolcri, which may be described as 
a sublime effort to seek refuge in the past from the misery of the present and the darkness of 
the future).  

Another important work of Foscolo is the novel “Le ultime lettere di Jacopo Ortis” 
which was described by the 1911 Encylopedia Britannica as a more politicized version of 
Goethe’s “The Sorrows of Young Werther, for the hero of Foscolo embodies the mental 
sufferings and suicide of an undeceived Italian patriot just as the hero of Goethe places before 
us the too delicate sensitiveness embittering and at last cutting short the life of a private 
German scholar." The story of Foscolo, like that of Goethe, had a groundwork of melancholy 
fact. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    310                            

 

  

 

 

Nacque e trascorse la sua prima giovinezza a Zante, piccola isola del Mare Ionio, che 
ricorderà con nostalgia (come nei suoi “Sonetti”), quando ne sarà ormai lontano. 

Si trasferì, infatti, a Venezia, dove aderì agli ideali liberali, ai quali restò fedele per 
tutta la vita, combattendo per la loro realizzazione ed affrontando per essi la miseria e l’esilio 
(morrà a Londra nel 1827). 

Visse a Milano, Pavia, Bologna e Firenze: in questa città, ricca di opere d’arte, si 
dedicò alla composizione di un poema dedicato alle “Grazie”, nel quale rievoca la bellezza 
classica e la funzione civilizzatrice dell’Arte. 

Una parte della sua produzione letteraria, infatti, è legata al Neo-classicismo, 
movimento culturale contemporaneo all’Impero napoleonico, che esalta ed imita la perfezione 
formale delle opere classiche, sia greche che romane. 

In altre opere, invece, prevale l’ispirazione romantica, legata ai temi dell’Amore, della 
Patria e della Morte, interpretata non come la fine di tutto, bensì come quella realtà che 
alimenta il ricordo delle persone amate ed il desiderio di imitare i loro grandi esempi. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    311                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

To Zakynthos 

(1802-1803) 

A Zacinto 

(1802-1803) 
 

Nor ever more to touch the sacred shores 
Where I was cradled as a tiny boy, 

Zakynthos mine, mirroring in the waves 
Of the Greek sea whence Venus, virgin, rose  

And with her first smile fecundated all 
Those islands, so thy fronds and limpid clouds 

Entered unsilenced the illustrious tale 
Of him who sang the fateful waters and  

The roaming exile from whose changing paths 
Ulysses, splendid with ill-luck and fame, 

Returned to kiss his rocky Ithaca.  
Naught else thy son can give thee but his song, 

O my maternal earth: for us stern fate 
Prescribed an unlamented burial. 

 
Translated by:  Carl Selph, 1999 

 
Né più mai toccherò le sacre sponde 
ove il mio corpo fanciulletto giacque, 
Zacinto mia, che te specchi nell'onde 
del greco mar da cui vergine nacque 
Venere, e fea quelle isole feconde 

col suo primo sorriso, onde non tacque 
le tue limpide nubi e le tue fronde 
l'inclito verso di colui che l'acque 
cantò fatali, ed il diverso esiglio 

per cui bello di fama e di sventura 
baciò la sua petrosa Itaca Ulisse. 

Tu non altro che il canto avrai del figlio, 
o materna mia terra; a noi prescrisse 

il fato illacrimata sepoltura. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    312                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giuseppe Giusti (1809 - 1850) 
 

 
 

Tuscan satirical poet, he was born in 1809 in a small village near Pistoia in a rich and 
cultivated family. At twelve Giusti was sent to school at Florence, and afterwards to Pistoia 
and Lucca and during those years he wrote his first verses. In 1826 he went to study law in 
Pisa but, disliking the study, he spent eight years in the course, instead of the customary four.  

Having at last entered the legal profession, he left Pisa to went to Florence, nominally 
to practise, but really to enjoy life in the capital of Tuscany. It was then he wrote his finest 
verses, by means of which, although his poetry was not yet collected in a volume, but for 
some years passed from hand to hand, his name gradually became famous. The greater part of 
his poems were published clandestinely at Lugano in Switzerland, at no little risk, as the work 
was destined to undermine the Austrian rule in Italy. 

The poetry of Giusti, under a light trivial aspect, has a lofty civilizing significance. 
The type of his satire is entirely original, and it had also the great merit of appearing at the 
right moment, of wounding judiciously, of sustaining the part of the comedy that "castigat 
ridendo mores." Hence his verse, apparently jovial, was received by the scholars and 
politicians of Italy in all seriousness.  

He shared the liberal principles of the Florentine and Milanese middle class and was a 
close friend of Manzoni, who is mentioned in his celebrated composition “Sant’Ambrogio”. 
Manzoni himself in some of his letters showed a hearty admiration of the genius of Giusti. 

In this poem, the verses of which are at times humorous and at times emotional, he 
meditates on History which often, because of some kings thirsty of power and richness,  
breaks up people who, instead, could live in peace and friendship. In his poetry we can also 
find a lot of allusions to the oppression wielded by the Habsburg Empire in Italy and in some 
other central Europe Countries (such as Bohemia). 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Poeta satirico toscano, nacque nel 1809 nei pressi di Pistoia, studiò a Pisa e morì a 
Firenze nel 1850. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    313                            

 

  

Condivise gli ideali liberali della borghesia fiorentina e milanese e fu amico di 
Alessandro Manzoni, che egli ricorda nel suo componimento poetico più celebre: 
“Sant’Ambrogio”. 

In questa poesia, i cui versi sono talvolta scherzosi e talaltra commossi, egli medita 
sulla Storia che spesso divide, con la complicità di sovrani avidi di ricchezze e di potere, 
popoli che potrebbero essere amici e vivere in pace. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    314                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Sant’Ambrogio 

(1845) 

Sant’Ambrogio 

(1845) 
 
In this poem , deep and humorous at the same time, the 

Tuscan poet expresses the feelings of humanity and 
brotherhood he felt in his heart one morning, in an 

unpredictable way, towards the soldiers of the Austrian army 
that occupied the Lombardy in that period. 

That day, he had entered, by pure chance, the Saint 
Ambrogio’s church in Milan and found it full of those enemy 

soldiers; but listening to their heartsick chants, full of 
nostalgia for the far homeland, he had realized that those 
soldiers were victims of an oppression policy, just as as 

Italians. The poetry of Giusti under a light trivial aspect, has 
a lofty civilizing significance. The type of his satire is entirely 

original and it had also the great merit of appearing at the 
right moment, of wounding judiciously, of sustaining the part 
of the comedy that "punishes, by laughing, habits”. Hence 
his verses apparently jovial, was received by the scholars 

and politicians of Italy in all seriousness . Alessandro 
Manzoni in some of his letters showed a hearty admiration 
of the genius of Giusti; and the weak Austrian and Bourbon 
governments regarded them as of the gravest importance. 
His poetry is  directed against social abuses of many sorts, 

and at the same time they express a longing for political and 
moral regeneration. In view of the frankness and the 

acritude with which he assailed the grand-ducal government 
and the Austrians, it is surprising that he escaped the 

dungeon to which so many other Italian patriots of the time 
were condemned. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Vostra eccellenza che mi sta in cagnesco/ Per que’ 

pochi scherzucci di dozzina , 
e mi gabella per anti-tedesco / perché metto le birbe alla 

berlina, 
o senta il caso avvenuto di fresco / a me, che girellando 

una mattina, 
càpito in Sant’ Ambrogio di Milano,/ in quello vecchio, la 

fuori di mano. 
M’era compagno il figlio giovinetto/ D’un di que’ capi un 

po’ pericolosi, 
di quel tal Sandro, autor d’un romanzetto/ ove si tratta di 

Promessi Sposi… 
Che fa il nesci, Eccellenza? O non l’ha letto?/ Ah, 

intendo: il suo cervel, Dio lo riposi, 
in tutt’altra faccende affacendato, / a questa roba è 

morto e sotterrato. 
Entro, e ti trovo un pieno di soldati,/ di que’ soldati 

settentrionali, 
come sarebbe Boemi e Croati, / messi qui nella vigna a 

far da pali: 
di fatto se ne stavano impalati,/ come sogliano in faccia 

a’ generali, 
co’ baffi di copecchio e con que’ musi,/ davanti a Dio 

diritti come fusi. 
Mi tenni indietro; ché piovuto in mezzo / Di quella 

marmaglia, io non lo nego 
D’aver provato un senso di ribrezzo / Che lei non prova 

in grazia dell’impiego. 
Sentiva un afa, un abito di lezzo: / scusi, Eccellenza, mi 

parean di sego, 
in quella bella casa del Signore, / fin le candele dell’altar 

maggiore. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    315                            

 

  

Ma in quella che s’appresta il sacerdote / a consacrar la 
mistica vivanda 

di sùbita dolcezza mi percuote / su, di verso l’altare, un 
suon di banda. 

Dalle trombe di guerra uscian le note / Come di voce 
che si raccomanda 

D’una gente che gema in duri stenti / e de’ perduti beni 
si rammenti 

 
Era un coro del Verdi; il coro a Dio / Là de’ Lombardi 

miseri, assetati; 
quello: O Signore, dal tetto natio, / che tanti petti ha 

scossi e inebriati. 
Ricominciai a non esser più io / E, come se que’ cosi 

doventati 
Fossero gente della nostra gente, / entrai nel branco 

involontariamente. 
Che vuol ella, Eccellenza, il pezzo è bello, / poi nostro, e 

poi suonato come va; 
e coll’arte di mezzo, e col cervello / dato all’arte, l’ubbìe 

si buttan là. 
Ma cessato che fu, dentro bel bello / Io ritornava a star 

come la sa; 
quand’eccoti, per farmi un altro tiro / da quelle bocche 

che parean di ghiro, 
un cantico tedesco lento lento / per l’aer sacro a Dio 

mosse le penne: 
era preghiera, e mi parean lamento, / d’un suono grave, 

flabile, solenne, 
tal che sempre nell’anima lo sento; / e mi stupisco che in 

quelle cotenne, 
in quei fantocci esotici di legno, / potesse l’armonia fino 

a quel segno. 
Sentia nell’inno la dolcezza amara / De’canti uditi da 

fanciullo; il core 
Che da voce domestica gl’impara,/ ce li ripete il giorni 

del dolore;/ 
un pensier mesto della madre cara,un desiderio di pace 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    316                            

 

  

e d’amore, 
uno sgomento di lontano esilio,che mi faceva andare in 

visibilio. / 
E quando tacque, mi lasciò pensoso/ Di pensieri più forti 

e più soavi. 
Costor, dicea tra me, re pauroso,/ schiavi gli spinge per 

tenerci schiavi; 
gli spinge di Croazia e di Boemme,/ come mandre a 

svernar nelle maremme. 
A dura vita, a dura disciplina, muti, derisi, solitari stanno, 

strumenti ciechi d’occhiuta rapina 
che lor non tocca e che forse non sanno;/ e quet’odio, 

che mai non avvicina 
il popolo lombardo all’allemanno, / giova a chi regna 

dividendo, e teme 
popoli avversi affratellati insieme. / Povera gente! 

Lontana da’ suoi, 
in un paese qui che vuol male, / chi sa che in fondo 

all’anima po’ poi 
non mandi a quel paese il principale! / Gioco che l’ 

hanno in tasca come noi. 
Qui, se non fuggo, abbraccio un caporale,colla su’ brava 

mazza di nocciòlo, 
duro e piantato li come un piolo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    317                            

 

  

[Index] 

Guido Gozzano (1883 - 1916) 
 

 
 

He spent most of his short life in Torino where he was born in 1883. He committed 
himself to poetry. At the beginning he followed D’Annunzio’s style but afterwards he rejected 
it completely and opted for the intimistic attitudes of the European Decadentism, in particular 
the French movement.  

He lost his faith in the too great ideals and preferred to dedicate himself to the humble 
living, which was what the currect of Crepuscolarismo held up as beliefs. He published two 
anthologies of melancholic poems La voce del rifugio in 1907 and I colloqui in 1911. 
Although he started suffering from phthisis he could benefit from his poetical success before 
dying in 1916. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Trascorse la sua breve vita quasi ininterrottamente a Torino, dove era nato nel 1883. 
Dedicatosi alla poesia, agli inizi seguì la linea di D’Annunzio, che poi rinnegherà 
apertamente, preferendo atteggiamenti intimistici propri di una parte del Decadentismo 
europeo, in particolare francese. 

Perduta la fiducia nei grandi e troppo ostentati ideali, scelse di dedicarsi agli aspetti 
umili del vivere quotidiano, seguendo la corrente del Crepuscolarismo. Pubblicò due raccolte 
di poesie, La voce del rifugio, del 1907, e I colloqui, del 1911, dal tono piuttosto dimesso e 
malinconico. Ammalatosi di tisi, poté godere di un buon successo letterario, prima di 
spengersi nel 1916. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    318                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The difference 

(1907) 

La differenza 

(1907) 
 
This poem is about the difference between mankind and 

other beings: it is the awareness of being mortal that human 
beings have and other beings do not. In that lies the 

happiness for living that animals can have whereas humans 
cannot and they always know that sooner or later they will 

die. The duck of the poem seems to be happy and carefree; 
it spashes down, fluttering and playing; it doesn’t dream of 

death, it doesn’t think to the near Christmas (where it will be 
probably cooked)… It teaches to human beings that death 
doesn’t exist, that men die because they think about death.  

The poetry of Gozzano is, after a beginning in which his 
works reflect a D’Annunzio style, later there is a visible a 

reaction to the high-flown rhetoric of D'Annunzio; this 
reaction is evident  in a colloquial style to express 

dissatisfaction with the present and memories of sweet 
things past. 

He is the first poet that demythologises D’Annunzio poetry; 
in fact he opposes the incomparable life, with the middle-
class mediocrity, by using images and concepts typically 

“crepuscolari”. Nevertheless he joins this mainstream only 
partially; we read this in a strophe of one of his most famous 

poems  he describes himself as “ good, sentimental, 
romantic” but, he adds “what I pretend to be, and I’m not”. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Penso e ripenso: - Che mai pensa l'oca 

gracidante alla riva del canale? 
Pare felice! Al vespero invernale 
protende il collo, giubilando roca. 
Salta starnazza si rituffa gioca: 

né certo sogna d'essere mortale 
né certo sogna il prossimo Natale 
né l'armi corruscanti della cuoca. 
- O pàpera, mia candida sorella, 

tu insegni che la Morte non esiste: 
solo si muore da che s'è pensato. 

Ma tu non pensi. La tua sorte è bella! 
Ché l'esser cucinato non è triste, 

triste è il pensare d'esser cucinato. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    319                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giacomo Leopardi (1798 - 1837) 
 

 
 

 

He is considered one of the greatest poets of the nineteenth century in Europe. 

He was born in Recanati, a sleepy backwater of the Italian Marches, into an 
aristocratic family with conservative and outmoded political ideas, far from the liberal 
excitements which troubled the most enlightened part of the Italian middle class. 

At first, he studied under his father guide, then by himself, confined in his father’s 
enormous library and distant from the young people of his village, acquiring a very extensive 
classical culture.  

He composed at first some erudite works, but he quickly abandoned them in order to 
devote himself to the beauty of poetry. 

Between 1819 and 1821 he composed the “Idilli”, a collection of lyrical poems of 
immortal beauty (in this collection the poems “L’infinito” and “La sera del dì di festa”, in 
which there is a perfect blend of memories, evocations, the contemplation of the nature and 
the regret for the fall of the youth passions .  

Later, the poet left Recanati and lived in some Italian towns such as Rome, Florence 
and Pisa, maintaining anyway his retiring  and lonely disposition, in keeping with his 
sorrowful and pessimistic vision of the reality; these  feelings will be perfectly expressed in 
the “Operette Morali”, a collection of philosophical considerations. 

In his early works, Leopardi had attributed of the human unhappiness to the 
civilization, responsible of having drawn the man away from the simplicity of the nature; in 
the “Grandi Idilli”, written between 1828 and 1830, his pessimism grows and becomes 
universal: the man, as any other living being, is doomed to sorrow by a Nature which is not a 
loving mother but a cruel stepmother. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    320                            

 

  

È considerato uno dei più grandi poeti dell’Ottocento europeo. 

Nacque a Recanati nel 1798 da una nobile famiglia di idee politiche antiquate e 
conservatrici, lontana dai fermenti liberali che animavano la parte più illuminata della 
borghesia italiana. 

Egli studiò dapprima sotto la guida del padre e poi da autodidatta, acquisendo, nel 
chiuso della propria biblioteca e distaccato dai giovani del suo paese, una vastissima cultura 
classica. 

Compose dapprima opere erudite, che ben presto abbandonò per dedicarsi alla 
bellezza della poesia. 

Tra il 1819 ed il 1821 compose i primi “Idilli”, raccolta di poesie liriche di immortale 
bellezza, come “L’infinito” e “La sera del dì di festa”, nelle quali si fondono evocazioni, 
ricordi, il rimpianto per il cadere delle giovanili illusioni e la contemplazione della Natura. 

Il poeta si allontanò successivamente da Recanati e visse in diverse città italiane, come 
Roma, Firenze e Pisa, ma sempre conservando un atteggiamento schivo e solitario, conforme 
alla sua concezione dolorosamente pessimistica della realtà, che egli esprimerà nelle 
“Operette morali”, profonde riflessioni di carattere filosofico. 

Nelle poesie giovanili Leopardi aveva attribuito l’infelicità della vita umana alla 
civiltà, che aveva allontanato l’uomo dalla semplicità dello stato naturale, ma nei grandi 
“Idilli”, scritti fra il 1828 ed il 1830, il suo pessimismo diventa cosmico: l’uomo, come ogni 
altro essere vivente, è condannato al dolore da una Natura che non è madre, bensì matrigna. 

Si spense a Napoli nel 1837, dopo aver scritto “La ginestra”, poesia nella quale esorta 
gli uomini ad unirsi fraternamente per fronteggiare le avversità della Società e della Natura. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    321                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The infinite 

(1819-1821) 

L’infinito 

(1819-1821) 
 

Always dear to me was this lonely hill, 
And this hedge, which from me so great a part 

Of the farthest horizon excludes the gaze. 
But as I sit and watch, I invent in my mind 
endless spaces beyond, and superhuman 

silences, and profoundest quiet; 
wherefore my heart 

almost loses itself in fear. And as I hear the wind 
rustle through these plants, I compare 

that infinite silence to this voice: 
and I recall to mind eternity, 

And the dead seasons, and the one present 
And alive, and the sound of it. So in this 

Immensity my thinking drowns: 
And to shipwreck is sweet for me in this sea. 

 
Translated by: Mark Towler - 1998 

 
Sempre caro mi fu quest'ermo colle, 
E questa siepe, che da tanta parte 

Dell'ultimo orizzonte il guardo esclude. 
Ma sedendo e mirando, interminati 
Spazi di là da quella, e sovrumani 

Silenzi, e profondissima quiete 
Io nel pensier mi fingo; ove per poco 
Il cor non si spaura. E come il vento 

Odo stormir tra queste piante, io quello 
Infinito silenzio a questa voce 

Vo comparando: e mi sovvien l'eterno, 
E le morte stagioni, e la presente 

E viva, e il suon di lei. Cosi tra questa 
Immensita s'annega il pensier mio: 

E il naufragar m'è dolce in questo mare. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    322                            

 

  

[Index] 

Mario Luzi (1914 - 2005) 
 

 
 

He was born in 1914in Florence, where he completed his studies and spent most of his 
long life, ended in the same town in 2005.  

In his first collection of poems (La barca, in1935, e Avvento notturno, in 1940) he 
expresses the best aspects and results of the Florentine Hermetic poetry. In the following 
poetic production he deals with the conflict between time and eternity, between man and 
cosmos.  

He is anyway able to escape from a pessimistic vision of life and contemporary 
reality, thanks to his deep Christian faith. His work of translation of the greatest French and 
English authors is remarkable as well. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque nel 1914 a Firenze, dove compì i suoi studi e dove trascorse gran parte della 
sua lunga vita, conclusasi nella stessa città nel 2005. 

Nelle sue prime raccolte di poesie (La barca, del 1935, e Avvento notturno, del 1940) 
esprime i migliori risultati dell’Ermetismo fiorentino. 

Nella produzione poetica successiva affronta la contrapposizione fra tempo ed eternità, 
fra individuo e cosmo. Riesce a sfuggire ad una visione pessimistica della vita e della realtà 
contemporanea grazie alla sua profonda fede. E’ notevole anche la sua opera di traduzione di 
grandi autori francesi ed inglesi. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    323                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 Nature 

(1947) 

Natura 

(1947) 
 

This poetry celebrates Nature and the calm and tranquillity 
that Nature gives mankind. Birds flying in the sky, a deep 

blue sea over the land, beautiful islands in the middle of the 
ocean where birds long for and cannot wait to go back to. 
Even if life is hard and war and fights make it harder for so 

many human beings it is still a great value to celebrate. 
Luzi was regarded as one of the greatest poets of his 

generation.His first book of verse, "The Boat, to which this 
poem belongs " was published in 1935, when the poet 

begins to see some other poets of the Hermetic School and 
collaborates with some avant-garde magazines such as 
Frontespizio and Campo di Marte. This is the hermetic 

period, that will last for over a decade and that will be never 
completely deserted by the author, but deepened and 
widened during his life. His work, so rich and is always 

matched by an intense critic meditation, expresses a deep 
and troubled religious sense, the convincement that poetry 

can be a practice that can rescue mankind from a life 
apparently meaningless.  

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
La terra e a lei concorde il mare  

e sopra ovunque un mare più giocondo  
per la veloce fiamma dei passeri  

e la via  
della riposante luna e del sonno  
dei dolci corpi socchiusi alla vita  

e alla morte su un campo;  
e per quelle voci che scendono  

sfuggendo a misteriose porte e balzano  
sopra noi come uccelli folli di tornare  

sopra le isole originali cantando:  
qui si prepara  

un giaciglio di porpora e un canto che culla  
per chi non ha potuto dormire  

sì dura era la pietra,  
sì acuminato l'amore. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    324                            

 

  

[Index] 

Goffredo Mameli (1827 - 1849) 
 

 
 

He was born in Genova in 1827. His father was a highly regarded navy officer of the 
Kingdom of Sardegna. Since he was young he had very strong patriot feelings and when there 
was the insurrection of Milano in 1848 he took part in it on Nino Bixio’s side. This initiative 
of his was very successful and let Mameli join Garibaldi’s army as a captain.  

In 1849 he fought to defend the Roman Republic which was besieged by the French 
troops as military support for the Pope Pius IX. He died when he was only 22 years-old from 
a serious wound he got during the battle. He wrote many poems but the only one remaining is 
the Canto degli Italiani which he composed when he was 20 and which became the Italian 
National Anthem named Inno di Mameli, after it was put to music. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Genova nel 1827 da un alto ufficiale della Marina del Regno di Sardegna. 
Fin dai suoi anni più giovanili fu animato da ferventi sentimenti patriottici, che lo portarono a 
correre in aiuto di Nino Bixio, durante l’insurrezione di Milano del 1848. Questa sua 
iniziativa fu coronata da successo e permise a Mameli di arruolarsi nell’esercito di Garibaldi 
con il grado di capitano. 

Nel 1849 combatté in difesa della Repubblica Romana, assediata dalle truppe francesi 
accorse in aiuto di Papa Pio IX, e morì a soli 22 anni in seguito ad una ferita riportata. Della 
sua attività poetica ci resta il Canto degli Italiani, che egli aveva composto appena ventenne e 
che, musicato da Michele Novaro, è divenuto l’Inno Nazionale d’Italia, conosciuto come Inno 
di Mameli. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    325                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

National anthem  

(1847) 

Inno nazionale 

(1847) 
 

This hymn was written by this great Mazzinian patriot in 
1847, the year preceding his death, occurred when he was 

about 20 years old because of the wounds he suffered while 
fighting for Italy liberation. For this,  his words are not 

rhetorical but express his burning wish to rescue and unify 
his homeland, recalling the value and courage the great 
Roman civilization has left as inheritance to our Country.  

Mameli’s culture was classic and the voice of Romanity was 
strong in him; the hymn, in fact, recalls Italians to the glory 
of ancient Rome: Italy (described as a person), is ready to 

the war against Austria and for this wears (s’è cinta la testa) 
the victory helmet of the Roman leader Scipio (the leader 

who rescued Italy from the invasion of the “barbarian” 
Hannibal. 

The hymn became, after 1946, the Italian national anthem. 
Before the birth of the republic, during the Savoy monarchy, 

the hymn was never performed due to the “republican” 
contents (“borthers” is just the word the Masons used to 

define their affiliation to the secret sect). 
In 1946, once the Republic was proclaimed, the hymn was 
chosen as “military anthem” for the oath of the new armed 

forces and, thereafter, as the national anthem. 
The work is often judged in a negative way; the critics point, 

generally on the low quality of music, defined as a “light 
march” or a “farmyard song”. What’s more they say that the 
history and patriotic  allusions are rhetoric and exaggerated.  

Today, anyway, the song has been revalued by some 
famous musicians and composers, who say that the hymn 

“is not so nasty, or rather, it is catchy and captivating ”. 
Finally, a last comment: all Italians know the first strophe 
and the refrain, really few know the whole hymn; few of 

them, actually, know how it ends, the allusions to the roman 

 
Fratelli d'Italia / L'Italia s'è desta,  

Dell'elmo di Scipio /  S'è cinta la testa.  
Dov'è la Vittoria? / Le porga la chioma,  

Ché schiava di Roma / Iddio la creò.  
Stringiamci a coorte / Siam pronti alla morte  

L'Italia chiamò.  
 

Noi siamo da secoli / Calpesti, derisi,  
Perché non siam popolo, / Perché siam divisi.  

Raccolgaci un'unica / bandiera una speme:  
Di fonderci insieme / Già l'ora suonò.  

Stringiamci a coorte / Siam pronti alla morte  
L'Italia chiamò.  

 
Uniamoci, amiamoci, / l'Unione, e l'amore  

Rivelano ai popoli / Le vie del Signore;  
Giuriamo far libero / Il suolo natìo:  
Uniti per Dio / Chi vincer ci può?  

 
Stringiamci a coorte / Siam pronti alla morte  

L'Italia chiamò.  
 

Dall'Alpi a Sicilia / Dovunque è Legnano,  
Ogn'uom di Ferruccio Ha il core, ha la mano,  

I bimbi d'Italia / Si chiaman Balilla,  
Il suon d'ogni squilla / I vespri suonò.  

Stringiamci a coorte / Siam pronti alla morte  
L'Italia chiamò.  

 
Son giunchi che piegano / Le spade vendute:  
Già l' Aquila d’Austria /Le penne ha perdute.  

Il sangue d'Italia, / Il sangue Polacco,  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    326                            

 

  

army (la coorte), to the Austrian eagle, the reference to the 
“balilla”, the little boy that in 1747 dared to throw a stone 

against an austrian cannon (all boys, during the Fascism will 
be called “balillas”), the mention of the Cossacks, and so 

on.. 
All Italians sing the anthem before the football matches but 

few, really know it! 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

Bevé, col cosacco, / Ma il cor le bruciò.  
Stringiamci a coorte / Siam pronti alla morte  

L'Italia chiamò. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    327                            

 

  

[Index] 

Alessandro Manzoni (1785 - 1873) 
 

 
 

Born in Milan in 1785, Alessandro Manzoni is one of the most illustrious authors of 
the Italian literature; The poet's maternal grandfather, Cesare Beccaria , was a well-known 
author, and his mother Giulia had literary talent as well. 

In 1819 Manzoni published his first tragedy, Il Conte di Carmagnola which, boldly 
violating all classical conventions, excited a lively controversy. 

The death of Napoleon in 1821 inspired Manzoni's powerful stanzas Il Cinque 
maggio, the most popular lyric in the Italian language. The political events of that year, and 
the imprisonment of many of his friends, weighed much on Manzoni's mind, and the historical 
studies in which he sought distraction during his subsequent retirement in a small village 
suggested his great work, the novel The Betrohed (in Italian I Promessi sposi) in which the 
humble popular characters Renzo and Lucia are the protagonists. ”.  

Completed in September 1822, the work when published, after revision by friends in 
1825-1827, at the rate of a volume a year, at once raised its author to the first rank of literary 
fame. It is generally agreed to be his greatest work; what’s more it is the most famous and 
widely read novel of the Italian language. Based in northern Italy in the early 17th century, 
during the terrible, oppressive years under Spanish rule, it is really a veiled attack on Austria, 
who controlled the region at the time of writing. It is also noted for the extraordinary 
description of the plague that struck Milan in 1630. 

In his works, he admirably expresses all the Romanticism ideals: the love for 
Homeland and the desire to rescue it from the foreign domination, the passion for history, an 
accurate psychological study either of the heroes (for example Adelchi, son of the longobard 
king, Napoleon…) or of the humble people.  

His civil passion is always expressed as a constant exhortation, addressed to Italians, 
to revolt against the Austrian tyranny. 

Nevertheless, the author deepest inspiration is the religious sense; it imbues all his 
works and is poetically expressed in the “Inni Sacri”, a series of sacred lyrics, and a treatise 
on Catholic morality, forming a task undertaken under religious guidance, in reparation for 
his early lapse from faith; in particular the poem “Pentecoste” in which Manzoni celebrates 
the Church awakening. 

Also his linguistic studies, to whom he devoted himself for a long period, assume a 
great importance; in order to improve and refine his knowledge of the Italian language he 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    328                            

 

  

moved to Florence, called “cradle of the Italian language” in which Dante, Petrarca and 
Boccaccio were born. 

Alessandro Manzoni died in 1873, overwhelmed by the affection and veneration of all 
the Italians who, even nowadays deem him as a great master and a great writer. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nato a Milano nel 1785, è uno dei più illustri autori della letteratura italiana e nella 
sue opere esprime mirabilmente gli ideali del Romanticismo: l’amore per la Patria ed il 
desiderio di liberarla dall’oppressione straniera, la passione per la Storia, uno studio 
psicologico accurato e partecipe tanto dei grandi eroi (da Adelchi, figlio del re dei 
Longobardi, a Napoleone) quanto degli umili personaggi del popolo, come Renzo e Lucia, 
che ha scelto quali personaggi del suo capolavoro, il romanzo de “I promessi sposi”. 

Tuttavia l’ispirazione più profonda di quest’autore è quella religiosa, che pervade tutte 
le sue opere e che si esprime poeticamente negli “Inni sacri”, in particolare nella 
“Pentecoste”, ove celebra la nascita della Chiesa. 

Sono molto importanti i suoi studi linguistici, ai quali si è dedicato per lunghi anni, 
trasferendosi anche a Firenze, per perfezionare il suo italiano con la raffinatezza del 
linguaggio parlato dalle persone colte di questa bellissima città toscana, città di Dante, 
Petrarca e Boccaccio, e quindi culla della letteratura italiana. 

Alessandro Manzoni si spense nel 1873, circondato dall’affetto e dalla venerazione 
degli Italiani che ancor oggi lo considerano un grande maestro di vita, oltre che un grande 
scrittore. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    329                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The fifth of May 

(1821) 

Il Cinque Maggio 

(1821) 
 

The death of Napoleon in 1821 inspired Manzoni's powerful 
stanzas Il Cinque maggio, one of the most popular lyrics in 
the Italian language. The political events of that year, and 
the imprisonment of many of his friends, weighed much on 

Manzoni's mind, and the historical studies in which he 
sought distraction during his subsequent retirement at 

Brusuglio suggested his great work. 
 With these verses the poet dwells, thoughtful, to consider 

the alternating fortunes of the Great Napoleon Bonaparte: in 
fact he had known some great victories which had elevated 

him to magnificent glory (he had become Emperor of 
French) but he had also suffered some hammering defeats 
and he was dead in a sad banishment, far from his Country 

and far from all persons he had beloved. 
When the news of Napoleon’s death broke, the poet, who 
had neither flattered him in the glory periods, nor despised 
him in the bad luck moments, entrusts his exploits to the 

posterity judgement and his soul to God’s mercy 
Manzoni never appreciated Naopoleon’ dictatorship; he, on 
the contrary, tried to capture the human aspects of a great 
leader who, somehow or other, deeply affected the history 
of Europe. Manzoni, in the poem, doesn’t  judge Napoleon 
according to a moral criterion and he leaves the decision to 
the posterity; he only says that, also for Napoleon, God has 

operated his mysterious plans without Napoleon himself 
being able to realize. The man-Napoleon is, for the poet, 
better than the dictator- Napoleon, as he had died in a 

Christian way. Therefore, the real object of the poem is God 
who delivers men from sin and Napoleon, consequently, is 

only the object of God’s providence. 
The poem transforms the commotion for Napoleon’s death 

in a meditation about life and death, the fragility of the 

 
Ei fu. Siccome immobile, dato il mortal sospiro,  
 stette la spoglia immemore orba di tanto spiro,  

così percossa, attonita la terra al nunzio sta,  
muta pensando all'ultima ora dell'uom fatale;  
né sa quando una simile orma di pie' mortale  

la sua cruenta polvere a calpestar verrà.  
 

Lui folgorante in solio vide il mio genio e tacque;  
quando, con vece assidua, cadde, risorse e giacque,  

di mille voci al sònito mista la sua non ha:  
vergin di servo encomio e di codardo oltraggio,  

sorge or commosso al sùbito sparir di tanto raggio;  
e scioglie all'urna un cantico che forse non morrà.  

 
Dall'Alpi alle Piramidi, dal Manzanarre al Reno,  
di quel securo il fulmine tenea dietro al baleno;  
scoppiò da Scilla al Tanai, dall'uno all'altro mar.  
Fu vera gloria? Ai posteri l'ardua sentenza: nui  

chiniam la fronte al Massimo Fattor, che volle in lui  
del creator suo spirito più vasta orma stampar.  

 
La procellosa e trepida gioia d'un gran disegno,  

l'ansia d'un cor che indocile serve, pensando al regno;  
e il giunge, e tiene un premio ch'era follia sperar;  
tutto ei provò: la gloria maggior dopo il periglio,  
la fuga e la vittoria, la reggia e il tristo esiglio;  

due volte nella polvere, due volte sull'altar.  
Ei si nomò: due secoli, l'un contro l'altro armato,  

sommessi a lui si volsero, come aspettando il fato;  
ei fe' silenzio, ed arbitro s'assise in mezzo a lor.  

 
E sparve, e i dì nell'ozio chiuse in sì breve sponda,  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    330                            

 

  

human and earthly glories and the painfulness of loneliness 
which can be intensified by the memories of the past 

greatness and by the anxiety of a need of help which never 
arrives (Napoleon who scans the horizon) and, at the end, 

the pacification through the Benevolent Faith and the 
overcoming of the human condition in the waiting of the final 

reward. 
We can divide, the manzonian poem in two different parts: 
the first one dominated by the presence of the man who 

faces himself, his earthly life, his human glory; the second 
one dominated by the meeting between the man and God. 

Both the parts begin with the reality of Napoleon’s death (Ei 
fu: he was; E sparve: and he disappeared). It’s the 

imagination and the spirituality  of Manzoni that touches the 
reader: not the personality of Napoleon dominator of the 

events or the story and ideas of that period but the 
loneliness and silence of the Saint Helen island, the 

opportunity of a deep contrition, matured in the meditation of 
the past life and in the reliance on God’s mercy. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

segno d'immensa invidia e di pietà profonda,  
d'inestinguibil odio e d'indomato amor.  

 
Come sul capo al naufrago l'onda s'avvolve e pesa,  

l'onda su cui del misero, alta pur dianzi e tesa,  
scorrea la vista a scernere  prode remote invan;  
tal su quell'alma il cumulo delle memorie scese.  

Oh quante volte ai posteri narrar se stesso imprese,  
e sull'eterne pagine cadde la stanca man!  

Oh quante volte, al tacito morir d'un giorno inerte,  
chinati i rai fulminei, le braccia al sen conserte,  
stette, e dei dì che furono l'assalse il sovvenir!  

E ripensò le mobili tende, e i percossi valli,  
e il lampo de' manipoli, e l'onda dei cavalli,  

e il concitato imperio e il celere ubbidir.  
Ahi! forse a tanto strazio cadde lo spirto anelo,  
e disperò; ma valida venne una man dal cielo,  

e in più spirabil aere pietosa il trasportò;  
e l'avviò, pei floridi sentier della speranza,  

ai campi eterni, al premio che i desideri avanza,  
dov'è silenzio e tenebre la gloria che passò.  

Bella Immortal! benefica Fede ai trionfi avvezza!  
Scrivi ancor questo, allegrati; ché più superba altezza  

al disonor del Gòlgota giammai non si chinò.  
Tu dalle stanche ceneri sperdi ogni ria parola:  

il Dio che atterra e suscita, che affanna e che consola,  
sulla deserta coltrice accanto a lui posò. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    331                            

 

  

[Index] 

Filippo Tommaso Marinetti (1876 - 1944) 
 

 
 

He was born in Alexandria in Egypt in 1876 and lived his first literature and political 
experiences in Paris where in 1909 he published the first manifesto of the futurists in Le 
Figaro.  

During the period of time just before the first world war he was a convinced 
interventionist in literature as much as in politics, like D’Annunzio. He was a fervent fascist 
and Mussolini named him Accademico d’Italia.  

The Futurism is an avant-garde movement of the first years of the 20th century which, 
apart from the unbearable content such as the anti-feminism or the exaltation of the war, 
brought about a revolution in the way things were expressed so that it influenced the 
contemporary languages especially the advertising one.  

Marinetti planned to revolutionise the poetic language so that it could become more 
modern as this world was made of machines, speed, industrialisation, hectic metropolitan life 
where the humans fought in any kind of competition as if they were military battles.  

So he abolished the syntax and altered the phonetics of the words so that he could get 
very original graphic effects. In 1914 he wrote Zang tumb tumb which speaks about the battle 
of Adrianopoli happened two years before between Bulgarians and Turkish. In this work he 
abandoned the rationality of the traditional syntax and replaced the logical connections with 
the excessive use of onomatopoeic effects and original spatial relations by disposing the 
words horizontally, vertically, diagonally and in a circular way.  

Before his death happened in Bellagio in 1944, he saw his political illusions break into 
pieces but also the fact that some of his expressive innovations kept being alive. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque ad Alessandria d’Egitto nel 1876 e visse le sue prime esperienze politico-
letterarie a Parigi, dove, nel 1909, pubblicò su Le Figaro il primo manifesto del Futurismo. 

Durante il periodo precedente alla prima guerra mondiale fu un acceso interventista, in 
una fusione tra letteratura militante ed orientamento politico aggressivo, simile a quello di 
D’Annunzio. Fu fervente fascista e fu nominato da Mussolini Accademico d’Italia. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    332                            

 

  

Il Futurismo è un movimento d’avanguardia del primo ‘900, che, al di là dei contenuti 
assolutamente non condivisibili (come l’antifemminismo o l’esaltazione della guerra, 
considerata “sola igiene del mondo”!), portò una rivoluzione nei moduli espressivi che ha 
lasciato tracce profonde nei linguaggi contemporanei, in particolare in quello pubblicitario. 

Marinetti programmò di rivoluzionare il linguaggio poetico adeguandolo alla 
modernità, fatta di macchine, di velocità, di industrializzazione, di metropoli dalla vita 
vorticosa, dove gli uomini si scontrano in ogni tipo di competizione, come in battaglie 
militari. 

Così abolisce la sintassi, altera e sfrutta la componente fonica delle parole, 
ricavandone composizioni grafiche originalissime. In Zang tumb tumb del 1914, poema nel 
quale tratta della battaglia di Adrianopoli, avvenuta due anni prima tra Bulgari e Turchi, egli 
abbandona la razionalità della sintassi tradizionale per un’invenzione grafica, sostituendo i 
nessi logici con l’uso esasperato di effetti onomatopeici e con inediti rapporti spaziali, 
disponendo le parole in senso orizzontale, verticale, diagonale e circolare. 

Prima della sua morte, avvenuta a Bellagio nel 1944, vide cadere le sue esaltate 
illusioni politiche, ma anche l’affermarsi di alcune sue innovazione espressive. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    333                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

To the racing car 

(1921) 

All’automobile da corsa 

(1921) 
 

The  Futurism movement, which found in the poet Marinetti 
his main ideologist had,  since its birth,  a particular 

preference for cars and speediness. 
In fact, in the article “Le Futurisme” published on the 

newspaper “Le Figaro” in 1909 and containing the Manifesto 
of the new movement, either the racing car, symbol of 

beauty and considered above  the “Victory of Samotracia”, 
or the “man who takes the wheel through the Earth..” are 

praised and considered as the future of humanity. 
Marinetti. 

Even a year before the publication of the Manifesto, 
Marinetti published the poem “To my Pegasus” in which, in 
analogy with the winged horse of the Greek mythology, the 
car is compared to a kind of monster-demon, powerful and 
thunderous, able to cross mountains, rivers and plains and 

to jump in the “liberating Infinite”. 
 

In these futurist verses, the poet exalts the racing cars, their 
extraordinary speed, the exaltation which gives by 

devouring the roads of the world and penetrating infinite 
landscapes. 

The mighty and shiny car is, at the same time, humanized 
and deified, as an organism provided with an enormous life 

because of its power. The daring man, able to face the 
speed dangers, will be able to run away from the earthly 

banalities, in a kind of heavenly exaltation. 
 

The poem, moreover, anticipates the breaking-off, on the 
lexical plan, with traditional poetry, through the introduction 
of new words and the violation of the orthographical rules in 

order to obtain some particular onomatopoeic effects. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Veemente dio d’una razza d’acciaio, 
Automobile ebbra di spazio, 

che scalpiti e fremi d’angoscia 
rodendo il morso con striduli denti 
Formidabile mostro giapponese, 

dagli occhi di fucina, 
nutrito di fiamma 
e d’olî minerali, 

avido d’orizzonti, di prede siderali 
Io scateno il tuo cuore che tonfa diabolicamente, 

scateno i tuoi giganteschi pneumatici, 
per la danza che tu sai danzare 

via per le bianche strade di tutto il mondo! 
Allento finalmente 

le tue metalliche redini, 
e tu con voluttà ti slanci 
nell’Infinito liberatore! 

All’abbaiare della tua grande voce 
ecco il sol che tramonta inseguirti veloce 

accelerando il suo sanguinolento 
palpito, all’orizzonte 

Guarda, come galoppa, in fondo ai boschi, laggiù! 
Che importa, mio dèmone bello? 

Io sono in tua balìa! Prendimi! Prendimi! 
Sulla terra assordata, benché tutta vibri 

d’echi loquaci; 
sotto il cielo accecato, benché folto di stelle, 

io vado esasperando la mia febbre 
ed il mio desiderio, 

scudisciandoli a gran colpi di spada. 
E a quando a quando alzo il capo 

per sentirmi sul collo 
in soffice stretta le braccia 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    334                            

 

  

folli del vento, vellutate e freschissime 
Sono tue quelle braccia ammalianti e lontane 

che mi attirano, e il vento 
non è che il tuo alito d’abisso, 

o Infinito senza fondo che con gioia m’assorbi! 
Ah! ah! vedo a un tratto mulini 

neri, dinoccolati, 
che sembran correr su l’ali 

di tela vertebrata 
come su gambe prolisse 

Ora le montagne già stanno per gettare 
sulla mia fuga mantelli di sonnolenta frescura, 

là, a quel sinistro svolto 
Montagne! Mammut in mostruosa mandra, 

che pesanti trottate, inarcando 
le vostre immense groppe, 

eccovi superate, eccovi avvolte 
dalla grigia matassa delle nebbie! 
E odo il vago echeggiante rumore 

che sulle strade stampano 
i favolosi stivali da sette leghe 

dei vostri piedi colossali 
O montagne dai freschi mantelli turchini! 

O bei fiumi che respirate 
beatamente al chiaro di luna! 

O tenebrose pianure! Io vi sorpasso a galoppo! 
Su questo mio mostro impazzito! 

Stelle! mie stelle! l’udite 
il precipitar dei suoi passi? 

Udite voi la sua voce, cui la collera spacca 
la sua voce scoppiante, che abbaia, che abbaia 

e il tuonar de’ suoi ferrei polmoni 
crrrrollanti a prrrrecipizio 
interrrrrminabilmente? 

Accetto la sfida, o mie stelle! 
Più presto! Ancora più presto! 

E senza posa, né riposo! 
Molla i freni! Non puoi? 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    335                            

 

  

Schiàntali, dunque, 
che il polso del motore centuplichi i suoi slanci! 

Urrà! Non più contatti con questa terra immonda! 
Io me ne stacco alfine, ed agilmente volo 

sull’inebbriante fiume degli astri. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    336                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giuseppe Mazzini (1805 - 1872) 
 

 
 

Giuseppe Mazzini, considered the father of Italian Risorgimento, was born in Genova 
in 1805. Since young he was keen to policy and to the troubled events of his dearly loved 
Italy. His mother, Maria Drago, guided him towards the knowledge of the Italian 
patriots’efforts who after having fought for their country and having been defeated, were 
obliged to escape into exile. At the end of his studies with a degree in law, he affiliated with 
Carboneria, the nineteenth century Italian secret organisation which used to arrange rebel 
movements in order to free populations oppressed by either absolutist governments or the 
power of foreign dominators. 

In 1830 he was betrayed, denounced to the police and imprisoned in the fortress of 
Savona. During that painful detention he decided to fund a new association in order to bring 
together for a common goal, all those willing to fight for independence. Once back to freedom 
again, he chose to go into exile in order to be able to continue arranging patriotic rebel 
movements, bringing up the people and animating young people to strong ideals. Then, settled 
in France in 1831 he funded the Giovane Italia in Marseilles, a secret organization aimed at 
playing a role in the realisation of a country “One, Free, Independent, Republican”. 

Indomitable spirit, he had to face an infinite number of dangers and he was sentenced 
several times and forced to go into exile in different countries such as Switzerland where he 
funded the Giovane Europa aimed at bringing together all the oppressed people willing to 
fight for independence, like Polish and German people. Although he was hardly able to 
maintain himself working for newspapers and magazines, in 1841 he funded a free access 
school for poor young people faithful to his principles. In fact, according to his opinion, 
people had to be set free from their ignorance and made able to autonomously improve both 
their own living conditions and their political once as well as economical. He did not 
recognized the authority of the church but he was aimed by a deep religious spirit and he 
expressed one of his highest ideas by the words “God and People”.  

In 1848 Giuseppe Mazzini rushed to Rome where a Republic was recently constituted; 
he took part to the Government in Rome and at its desperate resistance against French troops, 
which soon conquered it and forced him to a new exile. He died in Pisa, in 1872 under the 
assumed name Brown that he used in order to escape from the police by pretending to be 
English. So he died as foreign in his country to which he had devoted all his life. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    337                            

 

  

 

 

Giuseppe Mazzini, considerato il padre del Risorgimento italiano, nacque a Genova 
nel 1805 e mostrò, fin dai suoi anni più giovanili, un vivissimo interesse per la politica e, in 
particolare, per le tormentate vicende della sua amata Italia. La madre, Maria Drago, gli 
insegnò a conoscere ed amare le sofferenze dei patrioti che, dopo aver combattuto per la 
patria ed essere stati sconfitti, dovevano fuggire in esilio. Terminati gli studi e laureatosi in 
Giurisprudenza, si affiliò alla Carboneria, società segreta che organizzava moti insurrezionali 
per liberare le popolazioni oppresse da governi di tipo assolutistico o da dominazioni 
straniere.  

Nel 1830 fu tradito, denunciato ed imprigionato nella fortezza di Savona. Durante 
questo periodo di amara prigionia decise di fondare una nuova associazione che riunisse in un 
intento comune tutti coloro che volevano lottare per l’indipendenza e, tornato in libertà, scelse 
l’esilio pur di poter continuare ad organizzare moti patriottici, educando il popolo ed 
animando i giovani con forti ideali. Stabilitosi in Francia, nel 1831 fondò a Marsiglia la 
Giovane Italia, società segreta che si proponeva di contribuire alla realizzazione di una patria 
che fosse”Una, libera, indipendente e repubblicana”.  

Spirito indomito, dovette affrontare infiniti pericoli, fu più volte condannato a morte e 
quindi costretto all’esilio in diversi paesi, fra cui la Svizzera, dove fondò la Giovane Europa, 
con l’intento di riunire tutti coloro che, appartenendo a popoli oppressi, come i Polacchi o i 
Tedeschi, volessero lottare per l’indipendenza. Pur ricavando a stento di che vivere con la sua 
collaborazione a giornali e riviste, nel 1841 fondò a Londra una scuola gratuita per ragazzi 
poveri, fedele alla sua convinzione che il popolo dovesse essere liberato dall’ignoranza e reso 
capace di migliorare da solo le proprie condizioni di vita, sia politiche sia economiche. Egli 
non riconosceva l’autorità della Chiesa, ma era animato da un profondo spirito religioso ed 
esprimeva uno dei suoi più elevati ideali con le parole “ Dio e Popolo!”.  

Nel 1848 Giuseppe Mazzini accorse a Roma, che si era costituita a Repubblica, e 
partecipò al suo governo ed alla sua disperata resistenza contro le truppe francesi, che ben 
presto la conquistarono, costringendolo ad un nuovo esilio. 

Egli morì a Pisa nel 1872, sotto il falso nome di Brown, che aveva assunto per 
sfuggire alla polizia fingendosi inglese: è morto da straniero nella patria alla quale aveva 
dedicato tutta la vita.  

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    338                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

From “Duties of men” 

The education (1860) 

Da “Doveri dell’uomo” 

L’educazione (1860) 
 

In this short extract of the  high moralistic essay “On the 
duties of man: the Education” we can find the summary of 
the civil and pedagogical passion of the author who has 

strenuously devoted himself either to Italy liberation or to the 
children and youth education, in particular those belonging 
to the lower classes that wouldn’t have had, otherwise this 

opportunity. 
During his life, Mazzini furthered  the century great 

humanitarian causes such the fundamental equality of 
human beings, regardless the gender, race, religion or 

nationality, the abolition of the death penalty and of slavery, 
the freedom of religion, press and thinking.  

The essay was published in 1860 and it  synthesizes his 
moral, religious and political thinking. It is very well known 

and appreciated all over the world.   
The philosophy of the author, in all the work, is deeply 

related to the future of the human kind, a future founded on 
the active participation of everybody and  on a free and 
harmonic development of the men capacities in order to 

reach to the solution of the social problems. All men must 
know they have their  rights  and their duties and the 

balance between these  two aspects  is the expression of 
the universal moral law which originates from God and 

brings to the mutual love to the brotherhood. All this 
contributes to the Republic birth and, for Mazzini, Republic 
means education. Nobody else, among the political thinkers  

has given to the education a so high value.  
The essay points out Mazzini's idea of national self-

determination on his distinction between rights and duties 
and finally his republican (and in this sense political, not 

ethnic) view of the nation-people. It emerges  that, even if 
Mazzini shared a voluntaristic idea of the nation, he none 

 
Dio vi ha fatti educabili. Voi dunque avete dovere di 

educarvi per quanto è in voi, e diritto a che la società 
alla quale appartenete non vi impedisca nella vostra 

opera educatrice, vi aiuti in essa e vi supplisca quando i 
mezzi di educazione vi manchino. 

La vostra libertà, i vostri diritti, la vostra emancipazione 
da condizioni sociali ingiuste, la missione che ciascun di 
voi deve compiere qui sulla terra, dipendono dal grado 

di educazione che vi è dato raggiungere. Senza 
educazione voi non potete scegliere giustamente fra il 

bene e il male; non potete acquistar coscienza dei vostri 
diritti; non potete ottenere quella partecipazione nella 

vita politica senza la quale non riuscirete ad 
emanciparvi; non potete definire a voi stessi la vostra 

missione. 
 

L'educazione è il pane delle anime vostre. Senza essa, 
le vostre facoltà dormono assiderate, infeconde, come la 

potenza di vita che cova nel germe dorme isterilita, se 
esso è cacciato in terreno non dissodato, senza 

benefizio d'irrigazione e cure dell’assiduo coltivatore. 
 

Oggi voi o non avete educazione o l'avete da uomini e 
da poteri che nulla rappresentano fuorché se stessi e, 

non servendo a un principio regolatore, sono condannati 
essenzialmente a mutilarla o falsarla. I meno tristi fra i 
vostri educatori credono aver soddisfatto al debito loro, 

quando hanno inegualmente aperto sul territorio che 
reggono un certo numero di scuole dove i vostri figli 

possono ricevere un grado qualunque d'insegnamento 
elementare. Questo insegnamento consiste 

principalmente nel leggere, scrivere e computare… 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    339                            

 

  

the less had a clear perception that the argument of popular 
consensus needed to be limited (and legitimated) by 

normative principles, which for him were true democratic 
principles. Mazzini's originality and modernity lay in his 

capacity to avoid being a universalist in the old 
cosmopolitan sense without becoming a relativist. He faced 

the tension between universality and national identity by 
making the former concrete and inclusive: universality 

meant humanity which revealed itself through and within 
each nation, and was synonymous with democracy. 

Democracy at home is the premise for democracy abroad: 
this is Mazzini's legacy. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    340                            

 

  

[Index] 

Eugenio Montale (1896 - 1981) 
 

 
 

He was born in Genova and there he began his technical and music studies. He had to 
stop them in 1917 when he had to go to first world war front as an infantry officer. After the 
war he went back to Genova where he devoted himself to the literary studies and to the poetry 
activity.  

In 1925 he published his first collection of verses, Ossi di seppia, in which he 
describes the rocky and sunny landscapes of his Liguria. In 1927 he moved to Florence, 
where at first he worked for the Bemporad publisher and, later, he managed the Viesseux 
Cabinet a renowned Institute for the scientific and literary culture; this assignment allowed 
him to meet and get in touch with some famous writers, such as Elio Vittorini.  

In 1939 he published his second collection of poems, the Occasioni, devoting himself, 
at the same time, to the activity of translator. In 1948 he moved to Milan, where he was sub 
editor of the national newspaper Corriere della sera and music critic. Before dying in Milan, 
in 1983, he received a lot of great reviews: he was appointed senator for life and, in 1975, 
conferred the Nobel prize for Literature. His poetic production expresses the “pain of living”, 
a conception of a life pervaded by a deep sense of disappointment and disenchantment. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  
 

Nacque nel 1896 a Genova, dove iniziò i suoi studi di tipo tecnico e musicale, che 
dovette interrompere nel1917 per andare al fronte della prima guerra mondiale, come ufficiale 
di fanteria. Tornato a Genova, si dedicò agli studi letterari ed alla attività poetica. 

Nel 1925 pubblicò la sua prima raccolta di versi, Ossi di seppia, ambientati nei 
paesaggi rocciosi ed assolati della sua Liguria. Nel 1927 si trasferì a Firenze, dove lavorò per 
la casa editrice Bemporad e , successivamente, diresse il Gabinetto Viesseux, celebre Istituto 
di cultura scientifica e letteraria, incarico che gli permise di entrare in contatto con scrittori 
come Vittorini. 

Nel 1939 pubblicò la seconda raccolta di poesie, le Occasioni, dedicandosi nel 
contempo anche all’attività di traduttore. Nel 1948 si trasferì a Milano, dove fu redattore del 
Corriere della sera e critico musicale. Prima di spengersi a Milano, nel 1983, ebbe grandi 
riconoscimenti: fu nominato senatore a vita ed insignito del Premio Nobel per la letteratura 
nel 1975. La sua produzione poetica esprime il “male di vivere”: una concezione della vita 
pervasa da un profondo senso di delusione e di disincanto. 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    341                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The storm 

(1943) 

La bufera 

(1943) 
 

The storm that trickles upon the hard  
leaves of the magnolia, long thunder-rolls 

of March and the hail,  
(the sounds of crystal in your night- 

nest surprise you, of the gold 
that has dulled from mahogany, the page-edge 

of bound volumes, there still burns 
a grain of sugar inside the shell 

of your eyelid) 
 

the flash that crystallizes 
trees and walls and surprises them in that 

eternity of instant. - marble, manna 
and destruction - which, graved in yourself, 

you are condemned to bear and which ties you 
more than love to me, strange sister,- 

 
then the raw crash, the rattles, the quivering 

of tambourines on the furtive pit, 
the trampling of the fandango and on high 

a gesture, here and there frenetic... 
 

As when 
you turned and with your hand, cleared then 

your forehead of its cloud of hair, 
 

greeted me - to go into the dark. 
 

Translated by:  John Galassi 

 
La bufera che sgronda sulle foglie 
dure della magnolia i lunghi tuoni 

marzolini e la grandine,  
(i suoni di cristallo nel tuo nido 

notturno ti sorprendono, dell'oro 
che s'é spento sui mogani, sul taglio 

dei libri rilegati, brucia ancora 
una grana di zucchero nel guscio 

delle tue palpebre) 
 

il lampo che candisce 
alberi e muro e li sorprende in quella 

eternità d'istante - marmo manna 
e distruzione - ch'entro te scolpita 

porti per tua condanna e che ti lega 
piú che l'amore a me, strana sorella, - 

 
e poi lo schianto rude, i sistri, il fremere 

dei tamburelli sulla fossa fuia, 
lo scalpicciare del fandango, e sopra 

qualche gesto che annaspa... 
 

Come quando 
ti rivolgesti e con la mano, sgombra 

la fronte dalla nube dei capelli, 
   

mi salutasti - per entrar nel buio. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    342                            

 

  

[Index] 

Ada Negri (1870 - 1945) 
 

 
 

Born in Lodi, near Milan in 1870 in an humble and poor family, she was a teacher in 
an elementary school when she became famous for her poems, rich in human feelings, 
animated by socialist ideals and even by feminist ambitions.  

In the first decades of the nineteenth century she went through the fascination of 
behaviours which extolled the outstanding figures, according to the style of Marinetti and 
D’Annunzio. Anyway she later drifted apart from it, to achieve a Christian consideration of 
the human reality and its miseries.  

She died in Milan in 1945 after having been admitted and honoured at the Academy of 
Italy, but also after having lived and seen the devastation of her Country during the second 
world war. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nata a Lodi, nei pressi di Milano, nel 1870, da una famiglia di umili origini, era una 
semplice maestra elementare quando divenne famosa per le sue poesie ricche di sentimenti 
umanitari, animate da ideali socialisteggianti e perfino da aspirazioni che preannunciavano il 
femminismo. 

Nei primi decenni del Novecento subì la suggestione di atteggiamenti esaltanti le 
personalità d’eccezione, secondo lo stile di Marinetti e D’Annunzio. Se ne distaccò, tuttavia, 
per approdare ad una considerazione cristianamente sensibile della realtà umana e delle sue 
miserie. 

Morì a Milano nel 1945, dopo essere stata accolta ed onorata nell’Accademia d’Italia, 
ma anche dopo aver visto con profondo dolore la rovina del suo paese durante la seconda 
guerra mondiale. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    343                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Fountain of light 

(1946) 

Fontana di luce 

(1946) 
 

The poetess describes, through a lively and effective image, 
the burst of life and beauty when spring begins. She 
contemplates a bush that the warm sun of March has 

brought to bloom in a triumph of yellow blossoms which 
make it resembling to a fountain, with the branches like 

spoutings of light. 
The poem belongs to the second part of Ada Negri poetry. 

The first one, in fact  mainly characterized by a deep 
meditation about the heavy trial of the working class, the 

social claims and the class struggle.   
Once  reached the maturity, the poetess develops a better 
awareness of herself, of the depths of her  being and this is 
the synthesis of an artistic transfiguration which is a logical 

consequence of her affliction. It is, for the poetess, the 
realization that reality is not valueless and that art is 

supposed to recognize the goodness of whatever exists. 
Nature and Art  speak only through spirit and  only human 
beings can detect, through beauty the deep richness and 

the reality mystery.  
Ada Negri has felt art as a fascinating beauty, able to raise 

men in a world which is “above” this fugacious life. This 
transcendence is essentially based on the perception of the 
correspondence with GOD who is truth, unselfish gift and 

goodness. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Nel marzo ebro di sole il grande arbusto 

in mezzo al prato si coprì di gialli 
fioretti: le novelle accese rame 
salenti e ricadenti con superba 
veemenza di getto dànno raggi 

e barbagli a mirarle; e tu quasi odi 
scroscio di fonte uscir da loro; e tutta 

la Primavera da quell'aurea polla 
ti si versa cantando entro le vene. 

 
da: Fons amoris, - Mondadori, Milano, 1946 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    344                            

 

  

[Index] 

Ippolito Nievo (1831 - 1861) 
 

 
 

He was born in Padua in 1831, in a family pervaded by liberal sentiments who 
educated him to love for his homeland freedom. 

Once completed his law studies, he devoted himself to the literature and patriotic 
activities, volunteering, in 1859 in the “Cacciatori delle Alpi” troops, that fought the Second 
Independence war, under the leadership of Giuseppe Garibaldi. 

He later took part to the so called “Expedition of the 1000”, in order to liberate the 
Kingdom of the two Sicilies from the Borboni domination and held some important political 
and administrative assignments in the Island of Sicily once liberated by the garibaldian troops.  

He died in 1861, in the wreck of the boat “Ercole”, in which he was embarked for 
reaching Naples and Sicily in order to accomplish his duties.  

Although his life was short, he has left a lot of writings, permeated by a great love for 
his homeland, for the country where he spent his childhood, for the peasants and their dialects 
and, last but not least, his masterpiece, the novel “The confessions of an Italian”. This novel, 
full of autobiographical accents, narrates the fortunes of Carlo Altoviti and his cousin Pisana, 
a story interlaced with the events of the Unity of Italy. The narration is pervaded by the 
Romantic themes but, sometimes, it anticipates the Verism movement, though an absolute 
respect of the reality. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Padova nel 1831 da una famiglia di sentimenti liberali che lo educò 
all’amore per la libertà della Patria. 

Terminati gli studi in Giurisprudenza, si dedicò ad attività letterarie e patriottiche, 
arruolandosi nel 1859 nei “Cacciatori delle Alpi”, le truppe di volontari che combattevano per 
l’indipendenza dell’Italia sotto la guida di Garibaldi. Partecipò alla spedizione dei Mille e 
ricoprì incarichi politico-amministrativi nell’isola di Sicilia liberata dai Garibaldini. Per 
portare a termine tale compito s’imbarcò sul battello a vapore “Ercole”, diretto verso Napoli, 
e morì in mare a causa del suo naufragio nel 1861. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    345                            

 

  

Sebbene la sua vita sia stata breve, egli ci ha lasciato molti scritti pervasi da amore per 
la Patria, per la campagna dove ha trascorso la sua infanzia, per i contadini ed i loro dialetti, di 
cui sa riconoscere il valore linguistico, ed infine un romanzo che è il suo capolavoro: “Le 
confessioni di un Italiano”. L’autore, con accenti spesso autobiografici, vi narra le vicende di 
Carlo Altoviti e della cugina Pisana, che s’intrecciano con quelle dell’Unità d’Italia. La 
narrazione è pervasa di temi romantici, ma, talvolta anticipa, nelle descrizioni, 
l’atteggiamento veristico d’assoluto rispetto della realtà. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    346                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

To my daughters 

(1855) 

Alle mie figlie 

(1855) 
 

The poem is dedicated to the fire-flies, little bright insects 
which seem to bring on earth luminous reflections of the 
light of the stars. With their tenuous glow, the fire-flies 
wander in lonely places, attracting people inclined to 

meditation. They seem to exhort through calm and high 
thoughts, as the hope of a better future for the homeland: 
this was in fact the feeling which has dominated the poet’s 

life. 
The little fire-flies are the poets thoughts which are 

transposed in the poem; these thoughts buzz in the poet’s 
mind and wander in the air, trying to take off form the land 
and wishing to reach a “higher sky”; but it isn’t possible, so 

the poet’s thoughts, as  the insects with their faint flamelets, 
have to settle for the secluded cottages, the little villages, 

the lonely gardens, the dark cloisters. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Lucciolette che ronzate 

Pei crepuscoli ideali, 
Care stelle forviate 

Da vostr’orbite immortali, 
Forse ancor del ciel natìo 

Affatìcavi il desio? 
Io vi sciolgo l’ali al volo, 

Lucciolette cattivelle; 
Ite pur lambendo il suolo 
Colle timide fiammelle, 

Giàcche i cieli a voi contese 
Legge improvvida e scortese. 

Ai romiti casolari 
Nel silenzio dei villaggi 

Pei giardini solitari 
Seminate i vostri raggi, 

Fra le tenebre dei chiostri 
Seminate i raggi vostri. 
Pei tumulti delle feste 
Melanconiche volate, 

Sol palesi alle modeste 
Ciglia, e all’alme addolorate, 

Onde vengan esse poi 
Meditando dietro a voi. 
A chi stanco si risente 
Della stolida allegria 

Rischiarate santamente 
L’annebbiata fantasia, 

Perché al cor gli venga e al viso 
D’altro oprar più maschio riso. 
Lucciolette, anco un momento, 

Ed il pugno che vi accoglie 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    347                            

 

  

Vi darà libere al vento. 
Vinto han già le vostre doglie 

Il ritroso animo mio. 
Lucciolette addio, addio!... 

 

Da Le Lucciole 1855 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    348                            

 

  

[Index] 

Aldo Palazzeschi (1885 - 1974) 
 

 
 

Aldo Palazzeschi was born in Florence in 1885, in a family of rich merchants; this 
allowed him to nourish his passion for poetry and theatre.  

At first he joined the Futurism and collaborated with Filippo Tommaso Marinetti but, 
in the period preceding the first world war he grew away since he felt neutral, setting himself 
against the heated interventionism of the Futurists.  

He was recalled for military service in 1916 and, during the war years, he composed 
some ironical and playful writings, coming off from the fashionable and traditional literary 
movements.  

He went to Paris a lot of times, where he knew and got in touch some great artists, 
such as Filippo De Pisis, Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse. He wrote a lot of poems (i.e. 
L’incendiario in 1913), short stories (Stampe dell’Ottocento, in 1932) and his masterpiece, the 
novel Le sorelle Materassi, in 1934. 

He was able to alternate, in his wide work, some writings full of emotion with ironical 
al playful works. He died in Rome, almost ninety years old, in 1974. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

È considerato uno dei più grandi poeti dell’Ottocento europeo. Nacque a Firenze nel 
1885 da una famiglia di agiati commercianti che gli permise di assecondare la sua passione 
per la poesia e per il teatro. 

Inizialmente aderì al Futurismo e collaborò con Filippo Tommaso Martinetti, ma se ne 
distaccò nel periodo precedente alla prima guerra mondiale, poiché Palazzeschi si dichiarò 
neutralista, contrapponendosi all’acceso interventismo dei Futuristi. 

Fu richiamato alle armi nel 1916 e, durante gli anni di guerra, compose scritti ironici e 
scherzosi, distaccandosi dai movimenti letterari contemporanei ed anche da quelli tradizionali. 

Si recò più volte a Parigi, dove conobbe e frequentò grandi artisti, come Filippo De 
Pisis, Pablo Ricasso e Henri Matisse. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    349                            

 

  

Scrisse molte raccolte di poesie (come L’incendiario, del 1913), racconti (Stampe 
dell’Ottocento, del 1932) ed il romanzo, divenuto ben presto famoso, Le sorelle Materassi, del 
1934. Egli seppe alternare, nella sua vasta opera, scritti densi di commozione con altri ironici 
e scherzosi. Si spense a Roma, quasi novantenne, nel 1974. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    350                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Ara Mara Amara 

(1904-1914) 

Ara Mara Amara 

(1904-1914) 
 

This poem is about three old ladies who sit on the same 
green grass everyday and play the same game with the 

dices everyday and stay under the same shade everyday. 
They don’t even look up but keep on kneeling in the grass 

under the same shade. 
Due to the lack of movement, the temporal-spatial 

dimension is very important in the poem: the women “don’t 
lift their heads”, they are still, steady. It is in the observer 

that we have to find a movement, it is the poet who is 
reaching the scene: in fact in the fist part of the poem, the 
author describes “the big” (seen from afar) and then “the 

small” (seen at close). There is in fact a progression of the 
nouns, as the poem proceeds (from “slope” down to “high 

cypresses”, “little field”, “three women”, “dices”). 
The trio could symbolize something similar to death, an 
interpretation suggested by the black clothes of the old 
ladies and their attitude. The three old women could be 
identified with the three Parcae, the mythological figures 

responsible for birth, life and death of everybody.  
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
In fondo alla china,  
fra gli alti cipressi,  
è un piccolo prato.  

Si stanno in quell'ombra  
tre vecchie  

giocando coi dadi.  
Non alzan la testa un istante,  

non cambian di posto un sol giorno.  
Sull'erba in ginocchio  

si stanno in quell'ombra giocando. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    351                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giovanni Pascoli (1855 - 1912) 
 

 
 

He was born in San Mauro di Romagna in 1855 and studied in Urbino where he starter 
to love the classical culture.  

In 1867 he got shocked for his dad was murdered by unknown people and since that 
moment he started losing his serenity of mind. There were other deaths in his family and 
serious economical problems.  

He gave up studying and was arrested for taking part in the socialist movement. After 
he was released he accomplished his studies under the influence of the great poet Carducci 
and afterwards he dedicated himself to teaching. At the University of Bologna he succeeded 
Carducci and had the chair in Italian Literature till the year he died in 1912.  

His works are poetry and prose either in Italian or in Latin. He was given several 
awards and became popular outside Italy as well thank to the latin poems Carmina. His main 
pieces of work are Myricae, the Canti di Castelvecchio, the Poemi and Odi ed Inni.  

His verses, apparently simple, contributed to renovate the Italian culture opening up to 
the European current of Symbolism.  

Pascoli illustrated his poetry in Il fanciullino, in 1897. The poet is similar to a child as 
he is still able to perceive the mystery which lies behind the little things of daily life (such as 
the myricae which are humble little shrubs in the Mediterranean Maquis) and be happy and 
grateful for the great value every little thing can have.  

This new sensitivity leads the poet to leave the positivistic certainties of Carducci’s 
poetry behind and moves to the nostalgic and musical European Symbolism. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a San Mauro di Romagna nel 1855 e compì i suoi studi ad Urbino, dove 
imparò ad amare la cultura classica. 

Nel 1867 la sua vita fu sconvolta dall’uccisione, per mano di ignoti, del padre. Questo 
tragico evento segnò la fine della sua infanzia serena e fu seguito da altri lutti familiari e da 
gravi difficoltà economiche. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    352                            

 

  

Interrotti gli studi, fu arrestato per la partecipazione a moti socialisti. Tornato in 
libertà, grazie all’interessamento del grande poeta Carducci, si dedicò al completamento dei 
suoi studi e, successivamente, all’insegnamento. All’Università di Bologna succedette al 
Carducci occupando la prestigiosa cattedra di Letteratura Italiana fino all’anno della sua 
morte, che avvenne nel 1912. 

La sua opera è sia in poesia che in prosa e sia in lingua italiana che latina. Egli ottenne 
numerosi riconoscimenti e fama internazionale con la raccolta di poesie latine Carmina. Le 
sue opere principali sono Myricae, i Canti di Castelvecchio, i Poemi e Odi ed Inni. 

I suoi versi, apparentemente semplici, hanno contribuito a rinnovare la cultura italiana, 
immettendola nella corrente europea del Simbolismo. 

Pascoli ha illustrato la sua poetica nello scritto Il fanciullino, del 1897. Il poeta è 
simile ad un fanciullo, poiché è ancora in grado di percepire il mistero che si cela nelle 
piccole cose della realtà quotidiana (come le myricae, piccoli ed umili arbusti della macchia 
mediterranea) e di stupirsi per il valore simbolico che tutto può assumere. 

Questa nuova sensibilità porta il poeta ad abbandonare le solide certezze della poesia 
carducciana, pervasa di pensiero positivistico, per accostarsi al Simbolismo europeo, ricco di 
musicalità, di evocazioni, di nostalgie. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    353                            

 

  

[Index] 
 

In the fog 

(1904) 

Nella nebbia 

(1904) 
 

I stared into the valley: it was gone—  
wholly submerged! A vast flat sea remained,  

gray, with no waves, no beaches; all was one.  
 

And here and there I noticed, when I strained,  
the alien clamoring of small, wild voices:    

birds that had lost their way in that vain land.    
 

And high above, the skeletons of beeches,  
as if suspended, and the reveries    

of ruins and of the hermit’s hidden reaches.  
 

And a dog yelped and yelped, as if in fear,  
I knew not where nor why. Perhaps he heard  
strange footsteps, neither far away nor near—  

 

echoing footsteps, neither slow nor quick,  
alternating, eternal. Down I stared,  

but I saw nothing, no one, looking back.  
 

The reveries of ruins asked: “Will no  
one come?” The skeletons of trees inquired:  

“And who are you, forever on the go?”  
 

I may have seen a shadow then, an errant  
shadow, bearing a bundle on its head.  

I saw - and no more saw, in the same instant.  
 

All I could hear were the uneasy screeches  
of the lost birds, the yelping of the stray,  

and, on that sea that lacked both waves and beaches,  
the footsteps, neither near nor far away. 

 

Translated by: Geoffrey Brock 

 

E guardai nella valle: era sparito 
tutto! sommerso! Era un gran mare piano, 

grigio, senz'onde, senza lidi, unito.  
 

E c'era appena, qua e là, lo strano 
vocìo di gridi piccoli e selvaggi: 

uccelli spersi per quel mondo vano. 
 

E alto, in cielo, scheletri di faggi, 
come sospesi, e sogni di rovine 

e di silenzïosi eremitaggi. 
 

Ed un cane uggiolava senza fine, 
né seppi donde, forse a certe péste 

che sentii, né lontane né vicine; 
 

eco di péste né tarde né preste, 
alterne, eterne. E io laggiù guardai: 

nulla ancora e nessuno, occhi, vedeste. 
 

Chiesero i sogni di rovine: - Mai 
non giungerà? - Gli scheletri di piante 

chiesero: - E tu chi sei, che sempre vai? - 
 

Io, forse, un'ombra vidi, un'ombra errante 
con sopra il capo un largo fascio. Vidi, 

e più non vidi, nello stesso istante. 
 

Sentii soltanto gl'inquïeti gridi 
d'uccelli spersi, l'uggiolar del cane, 
e, per il mar senz'onde e senza lidi,  

le péste né vicine né lontane. 
 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    354                            

 

  

[Index] 

Cesare Pavese (1908 - 1950) 
 

 
 

He was born in 1908 in Santo Stefano Belbo, in the area of the Langhe, hills of 
Piemonte region, which he loved deeply and went back to almost every summer of his life. He 
was obliged to move to Torino for his work and there he worked for Einaudi publisher which 
was just founded. In particular he devoted himself to translate and spread out the most 
important authors of the North-American literature. 

Apart from his literature work he was very active in politics as well: he was put into 
prison because of his opposition to Fascism and, after that, in 1935 he was condemned to 
internal exile in Calabria. During this very hard period of time he started to write the diary Il 
mestiere di vivere which was published years later and the romance Il carcere. 

When he went back to Torino he found out that the woman he loved had got married 
to somebody else. He felt a deep sadness and a great loneliness. In 1936 he published a book 
written in verses, Lavorare stanca, and the romance Paesi tuoi, in 1941. La casa in collina, 
Prima che il gallo canti and La bella estate are very important pieces of work written in prose 
in the 40s.  

However, his work of art is La luna ed i falò, written in 1950 where he writes about 
the nostalgia of childhood and the places where he spent his first years. In those he tried to 
find himself in vain. In that very year he put an end to his life committing a suicide in a hotel 
room. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque nel 1908 a Santo Stefano Belbo, nelle Langhe, colline piemontesi che amò 
profondamente e dove tornò quasi ogni estate della sua vita. La sua attività lavorativa lo 
portò, tuttavia, a vivere a Torino, dove collaborò proficuamente con la casa editrice Einaudi, 
appena fondata. Si dedicò, in particolare, a tradurre e diffondere i più importanti autori della 
letteratura nord-americana. 

Oltre all’attività letteraria, si impegnò anche in un’intensa attività politica: per la sua 
opposizione al fascismo fu arrestato e, successivamente, nel 1935, condannato ad un anno di 
confino in Calabria. Durante questo duro periodo iniziò a scrivere il diario (che sarà 
pubblicato postumo) Il mestiere di vivere ed il romanzo Il carcere. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    355                            

 

  

Tornato a Torino, trovò la donna che amava sposata ad un altro: questa amara 
delusione accrebbe il suo senso di solitudine. Nel 1936 pubblicò un volume in versi, Lavorare 
stanca, e, nel 1941, il romanzo Paesi tuoi. Tra le opere in prosa sono da ricordare La casa in 
collina, Prima che il gallo canti e La bella estate, tutte scritte negli anni ’40.  

Ma il suo grande capolavoro è La luna ed i falò, del 1950, ispirato dalla nostalgia 
dell’infanzia e dei suoi luoghi, dove egli, invano, tenta di ritrovare se stesso. In quello stesso 
anno porrà fine alla sua tormentata esistenza suicidandosi in una camera di albergo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    356                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

In the morning you always come 
back 

(1950) 

In the morning you always come 
back 

(1950) 
 

The beam of light from sunrise 
breathes through your lips 
at the end of empty paths. 

Gray light of your eyes 
Sweet dewdrops of dawn 

engulf the houses. 
The city appears 
The stones smell 

You are life 
the reawakening 

 
Star lost 

in the light of dawn, 
the whispering breeze, 
mild warmth, breath - 

The night has reached an end. 
 

You are the light and the morning. 
 

Translated by: Chris Dolezalek 

 
Lo spiraglio dell'alba 

respira con la tua bocca 
in fondo alle vie vuote. 
Luce grigia i tuoi occhi, 

dolci gocce dell'alba 
sulle colline scure. 

Il tuo passo e il tuo fiato 
come il vento dell'alba 
sommergono le case. 
La città abbrividisce, 

odorano le pietre 
sei la vita, il risveglio. 

 
Stella sperduta 

nella luce dell'alba, 
cigolio della brezza, 

tepore, respiro 
è finita la notte. 

 
Sei la luce e il mattino. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    357                            

 

  

[Index] 

Sandro Penna (1906 - 1977) 
 

 
 

Born in Perugia in 1906, he moved to Rome at the age of twenty. He didn’t succeed in 
imposing himself for a long time and, in order to have enough to live, he did a lot a lot of 
activities such as journalist, translator and fine arts expert. In 1970 he gathered in a volume 
called Tutte le poesie, all the compositions he had written in the previous years.  

He preferred not to deal with the strong problems of the contemporary world, seeking 
refuge in a quiet vision of the natural reality, which often recalls the classical poetry of the 
Greek lyric poets. He passed away in Rome in 1977. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nato a Perugia nel 1906, si trasferì a Roma poco più che ventenne. Non riuscendo ad 
affermarsi come poeta, per vivere svolse diverse attività: fu giornalista, traduttore ed esperto 
di arte. Nel 1970 riunì in un volume, intitolato Tutte le poesie, i componimenti che aveva 
scritto negli anni precedenti. 

Preferì non affrontare le forti problematiche del mondo contemporaneo, rifugiandosi 
in una visione serena della realtà naturale, che ricorda sovente la poesia classica dei lirici 
greci. Si spense a Roma nel 1977. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    358                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The black stairs of my tavern 

(1906) 

Le nere scale della mia taverna 

(1906) 
 

The steps of my tavern  
you descend all drenched with wind.  

The beautiful fallen hair you have  
on the living eyes in a remote firmament  

of mine.  
In the smoken tavern  

now is the smell of port and wind.  
Free wind which models bodies  

and moves the steps of white sailors.  
 

Translated by: Fiamma Ferraro 

 
Le nere scale della mia taverna  
tu discendi tutto intriso di vento.  

I bei capelli caduti tu hai  
sugli occhi vivi in un mio firmamento  

remoto.  
Nella fumosa taverna  

ora è l'odore del porto e del vento.  
Libero vento che modella i corpi  

e muove il passo ai bianchi marinai. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    359                            

 

  

[Index] 

Carlo Pisacane (1818 - 1857) 
 

 
 

Carlo Pisacane is a tragically famous protagonist if the Italian Risorgimento and 
author of some political essays in which he enunciates very advanced theories about the 
importance of the social aspects of each movement finalised to the people liberation.  

He was born in Naples in 1818 but he soon left the home town, forced to stay in 
backwardness conditions by the Bourbon Government, and travelled to France and England. 
Back to Italy, he fought in the First Independence War and took part to the so called “Roman 
Republic”. He wrote an essay “The Revolution” in which he stated the necessity of 
eradicating each form of inequity and exploitation in order to be able, then, to set up a real 
democracy. 

To fulfil these ideals of democracy, he organised in 1857, an expedition in the island 
of Sapri, in order to enfranchise the peasants from the bourbons yoke. The population, semi- 
analphabet and unprepared, didn’t understand the noble and generous purpose and 
slaughtered, together with the bourbon troops, all the young patriots.  

Carlo Pisacane, frantic with sorrow for the tragic failure, took his life. 
 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

Personaggio tragicamente famoso del Risorgimento italiano, autore di saggi politici 
nei quali egli espone una teoria avanzatissima sull’importanza degli aspetti sociali di ogni 
movimento finalizzato alla liberazione del popolo. 

Nacque a Napoli nel 1818, ma ben presto abbandonò questa città mantenuta in 
condizioni di arretratezza dal governo borbonico, e viaggiò in Francia ed in Inghilterra. 
Tornato in Italia, combatté la Prima Guerra di Indipendenza e partecipò alla Repubblica 
Romana. Scrisse un saggio su “La rivoluzione”, affermando la necessità di eliminare prima 
ogni forma di ingiustizia e di sfruttamento per poter instaurare poi una vera democrazia. 

Per realizzare questi ideali organizzò, nel 1857, una spedizione a Sapri, per la 
liberazione dei contadini dall’oppressione e dallo sfruttamento dei Borboni. Quella 
popolazione meridionale, ancora semianalfabeta ed impreparata, non comprese questo nobile 
e generoso intento e trucidò, unendosi all’esercito borbonico, tutti i giovani patrioti. 

Carlo Pisacane, sconvolto dal dolore per questo tragico fallimento, si suicidò. 
 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    360                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Reasoning about progress 

(1849) 

Ragionamento sul progresso 

(1849) 
 

In his writings the author, who was a great patriot and 
sacrificed himself for his homeland, combines to the cause 

of the political freedom, the emancipation from misery, 
devoting himself to the sad conditions of peasantry from 

southern Italy, who were oppressed and sweated by the big 
landowners. In order to set them free, he will organize the 
Sapri expedition, in which he’ll find death together with his 

300 brothers-in-arms. 
In order to give memory to this event the poet Mercantini 
has written a poem “La Spigolatrice di Sapri”, a touching 
celebration of the heroic sacrifice of so many young lives. 
In this passage taken from the essay “On Revolution” the 

author reasons about progress, saying that, despite the fact 
this word is well know by everybody, nobody understands its 

deep meaning. 
He says that it’s undeniable the fact  that science finds out  

a lot of inventions which, applied to industry, trade and 
human beings , transform products, landscapes, fabrics and 

so on , improves the quality of life, shortens distances, 
transforms villages in superb towns, darkness  in light.. 

What he wonders, anyway, is if  the growing of the progress  
is able to distribute prosperity on everybody without 

exception; if the progress is able to raise the sense of 
dignity  in men, if progress is able to guarantee  freedom, to 

fight slavery, to allow men to express their opinion..  
The answer is no…where is in fact the improvement of the 

human condition? 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
La parola progresso suona nella bocca degli uomini 

d'ogni condizione, d'ogni partito, ma è da pochissimi, 
anzi quasi da nessuno compresa. I sorprendenti trovati 

della scienza che, applicati all'industria, al commercio, al 
vivere in generale, trasformano in mille guise i prodotti, 
sono fatti innegabili: noi vediamo, ove erano gruppi di 

capanne, sorgere superbe città; campi aspri e selvaggi 
squarciati dall'aratro, e resi fecondi; selve, monti, mari, 

superati; rozzi velli trasformati in finissime stoffe; le 
intemperie vinte con l'arte; le tenebre cacciate da 

fulgidissima luce; il navigar contro i venti; il percorrere 
con portentosa celerità sterminate distanze; finanche il 
fulmine reso rapido messaggiero dell'uomo; l'immensità 

dei cieli, le viscere della terra esplorate; gli astri, gli 
animali, i vegetabili, i minerali, tutti studiati, classificati, 

misurati... Se questo è il progresso, niuno può negarlo o 
non comprenderlo… 

Ma cotesto accrescimento continuo del prodotto e 
dell'umano sapere, spande egualmente la prosperità su 
tutti? Suscita nell'uomo il sentimento del proprio diritto, 
della dignità? Garantisce la libertà, garentisce il popolo 
dall'usurpazione di pochi, rende forse impossibile, sotto 

ogni forma, la schiavitú, ed assicura l'indipendenza 
dell'uomo dall'uomo, o almeno ne libra su giusta lance le 
correlazioni? Ognuno che vuol manifestare francamente 

la propria opinione, ognuno che studia la storia, che 
osserva il presente, risponderà: no, l'apogeo della civiltà 
romana, il secolo d'Augusto fu il perigeo della libertà; i 

rozzi italiani dell'XI secolo erano liberi, e vilissimi 
piaggiatori quelli del civilissimo secolo di Lorenzo De' 
Medici; i Francesi dello splendido secolo di Luigi XIV 
non furono che spregevoli cortigiani. Ove riscontrasi, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    361                            

 

  

adunque, il continuato miglioramento dell'umane 
condizioni? 

Da “La rivoluzione” 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    362                            

 

  

[Index] 

Salvatore Quasimodo (1901 - 1968) 
 

 
 

He was born in Modica, near Ragusa in 1901, but he left his Sicily when he was still 
young. For a while he lived in Florence where, his brother-in-law Elio Vittorini introduced 
him in the literary circles.  

Afterwards he moved to Milan and there he lived for a long time, teaching Italian 
Literature at the Music Institute. His first poetical period has an hermetic taste, as in Oboe 
Sommerso written in 1932. In 1949 he published his translation Lirici Greci which is still 
considered of insuperable beauty, for its ability of expressing the lyricism present in the 
fragments of the Greek poets.  

In 1942 he published Ed è subito sera: in this little poem we can find, besides the love 
for the classical culture, the moral and civil strain that, according to the poet, must animate 
each poet’s work.  

He passed away in Naples in 1968, few years after he had been awarded the Nobel 
Prize for Literature. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

Nacque a Modica, vicino a Ragusa, nel 1901, ma si allontanò giovane dalla sua Sicilia. 
Visse per un certo periodo a Firenze, dove il cognato Elio Vittorini lo introdusse negli 
ambienti letterari.  

Successivamente si trasferì a Milano, dove visse a lungo, insegnando Letteratura al 
Conservatorio. La sua prima fase poetica è di gusto ermetico, come Oboe sommerso, del 
1932. Nel 1940 pubblicò una sua traduzione dei Lirici greci che è considerata ancor oggi di 
insuperata bellezza, per la sua capacità di esprimere il lirismo dei frammenti di tali poeti. 

Nel 1942 pubblicò Ed è subito sera: all’amore per la cultura classica si aggiunge la 
tensione morale e civile che, secondo Quasimodo, deve animare ogni poeta. 

Si spense a Napoli nel 1968, pochi anni dopo essere stato insignito del premio Nobel 
per la Letteratura. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    363                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Man of my time 

(1947) 

Uomo del mio tempo 

(1947) 
 

You are still the one with the stone and the sling, 
Man of my time. You were in the cockpit, 

With the malevolent wings, the meridians of death, 
-I have seen you - in the chariot of fire, at the gallows, 
At the wheels of torture. I have seen you: it was you, 

With your exact science set on extermination, 
Without love, without Christ. You have killed again, 

As always, as your fathers killed, 
as the animals killed that saw you for the first time. 

And this blood smells as on the day 
When one brother told the other brother: 

"Let us go into the fields." And that echo, chill, tenacious, 
Has reached down to you, within your day. 

Forgot, O sons, the clouds of blood 
Risen from the earth, forget your fathers: 

Their tombs sink down in ashes, 
Black birds, the wind, cover their heart. 

Translated by: Mike Towler, April 1998 

 
Sei ancora quello della pietra e della fionda, 

uomo del mio tempo. Eri nella carlinga, 
con le ali maligne, le meridiane di morte, 

- t’ho visto - dentro il carro di fuoco, alle forche, 
alle ruote di tortura. T’ho visto: eri tu, 

con la tua scienza esatta persuasa allo sterminio, 
senza amore, senza Cristo. Hai ucciso ancora, 

come sempre, come uccisero i padri, come uccisero 
gli animali che ti videro per la prima volta. 
E questo sangue odora come nel giorno 
quando il fratello disse all’altro fratello: 

- Andiamo ai campi. - E quell’eco fredda, tenace, 
è giunta fino a te, dentro la tua giornata. 
Dimenticate, o figli, le nuvole di sangue 

salite dalla terra, dimenticate i padri: 
le loro tombe affondano nella cenere, 

gli uccelli neri, il vento, coprono il loro cuore. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    364                            

 

  

[Index] 

Gianni Rodari (1920 - 1980) 
 

 
 

He was born near Novara on the Orta lake in 1920 in a family of modest social 
conditions. His father, a baker died when he was ten. He studied as primary school teacher in 
1941 and began to write tales and rhymes for children.  

In the meantime he was politically committed and promoted the same values of 
democracy, social justice and anti-racism he taught his pupils through his poems, 
extraordinary simple and deep. He died in Rome in 1980.  

He has the merit of having deeply renewed the literature for childhood: his works 
aren’t any more the usual tales for children but poems and novels animated by surrealistic 
characters. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque vicino a Novara, sul lago d’Orta, nel 1920, da una famiglia di modeste 
condizioni sociali. Suo padre, un fornaio, morì di polmonite quando egli aveva solo dieci 
anni. Divenne maestro elementare nel 1941 ed iniziò a scrivere novelle e filastrocche per 
l’infanzia.  

Contemporaneamente si impegnava in politica, difendendo gli stessi ideali di 
democrazia, giustizia sociale ed antirazzismo che proponeva ai bambini con le sue poesie, 
straordinariamente semplici e profonde. Morì a Roma nel 1980.  

Egli ha il merito di aver rinnovato la letteratura per l’infanzia, dedicando ai bambini 
non più le solite favolette, ma poesie e racconti animati da personaggi surreali. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    365                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Sunless Naples 

(1947) 

Napoli senza sole 

(1947) 
 

This poem is written to celebrate the city of Naples and it is 
written for children in Rodari’s style. It is one of the carols 
and nursery rhymes Rodari has written in order to express 

ideals of antiracism, democracy and justice he strongly 
believed in. Rodari had the ability to write such simple 

rhymes expressing a very ethical content. In this context he 
speaks about Naples and the serious and critical situation 

the city has to go through. 
His rhymes are a  marvellous exploration of the worlds of 

creativity and imagination. The author's profound 
understanding of the child's unspoiled imagination shines 
through these collected reflections on the art of inventing 

stories. Rodari shows teachers how to stir young 
imaginations by building on simple words, phrases, and 

rhymes; juxtaposing seemingly unrelated words and images; 
creating "what if" scenarios; rewriting popular folk tales; 

speculating on "what happens next”.  Analysing the 
essential nature of stories, jokes, riddles, and poetry, Rodari 

delves deep into the mysterious heart of the creative 
process and vividly illuminates it for the reader. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Filastrocca del Pallonetto, 
vicolo storto, vicolo stretto, 
senza cielo e senza mare, 

senza canzoni da cantare... 
Chi farà musica e parole 

per te, Napoli senza sole? 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    366                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giovanni Domenico Ruffini (1807 - 1881) 
 

 
 

Born in Genova in 1807, he was, together with his brothers Jacopo and Agostino, an 
ardent follower of Giuseppe Mazzini, the Italian patriot, philosopher and politician whose 
efforts helped bring about the modern Italian state in place of the several separate states, many 
dominated by foreign powers, that existed until the nineteenth century.  

The three brothers took part to the political revolts of 1833 in order to fight the 
absolutism of the Savoy kingdom, but the were defeated. Jacopo was arrested and took his life 
in prison while Giovanni managed to escape in exile. 

He fled to London where he wrote a novel, in part autobiographical, “The Doctor 
Antonio” in which the social reality of that times is well portrayed. When Italy achieved 
independence, Ruffini went back in his region, where he died in 1881. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Genova nel 1807 e fu, con i fratelli Jacopo ed Agostino, un fervente seguace 
di Mazzini, del quale essi condividevano gli ideali liberali. 

Parteciparono ad i moti politici del 1833, nel tentativo di combattere l’assolutismo del 
Regno Sabaudo, ma furono sconfitti. Il fratello Jacopo fu catturato e si suicidò in carcere, pur 
di non tradire gli altri patrioti, mentre Giovanni riuscì a fuggire in esilio. 

Si rifugiò a Londra dove scrisse il bel romanzo, in gran parte autobiografico, “Il 
Dottor Antonio”, nel quale è efficacemente rappresentata la realtà di quel tempo. Quando 
l’Italia raggiunse l’indipendenza gli fu possibile tornare nella sua Liguria, dove morrà nel 
1881. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    367                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Don Pasquale 

(1843) 

Don Pasquale 

(1843) 
 

Over the course of his career, the musician Gaetano  
Donizetti wrote 65 complete operas, and worked with at 
least 21 librettists. His co-librettist for Don Pasquale was 

poet, novelist and Italian patriot Giovanni Ruffini. Although 
Ruffini and Donizetti quickly established a cordial friendship, 
they had a rocky working relationship. Ruffini proclaimed the 

Maestro “a fine, good, and able fellow, without pretences, 
and simple in manner.” But the poet wasn’t so enthusiastic 

about the task set out for him 
When Ruffini sent Donizetti verses that did not fit the 
existing music, the composer simply rewrote the text 

himself. Donizetti’s endless revisions tormented the poor 
poet. According to one story, 

Ruffini slaved over five versions of a single rondo, only to 
hear Donizetti say, “an idea came to me and I decided to set 
your first version after all.” When finally confronted with the 

completed libretto, Ruffini complained that Donizetti had 
destroyed “that little bit of logical connection which I had 

studied to put into my pieces.”  
Despite Ruffini’s reservations, he helped create a 

masterpiece. Don Pasquale’s libretto is economical, well-
crafted, and hilarious, striking just the right balance between 

satire and compassion. 
These humorous verses, give start to a lyric drama 

characterized, in addition to the wonderful music, by the 
narration of intriguing love events, with sly characters ready 

to swindle in order to allow the lovers to meet. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Son nov'ore; di ritorno  
il dottore esser dovria.  

(ascoltando)  
Zitto!... Parmi... È fantasia...  

Forse il vento che passò.  
Che boccon di pillolina,  

nipotino, vi preparo!  
Vo' chiamarmi don Somaro  

se veder non ve la fo. 
 

Da “Don Pasquale” Atto I, scena I 

opera di Gaetano Donizetti 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    368                            

 

  

[Index] 

Umberto Saba (1883 - 1957) 
 

 
 

He was born in Trieste in 1883; his mother was Jewish and she was deserted by her 
husband even before the author’s birth.The young poet suffered this family situation so much 
that he refused the paternal surname, replacing it with the word Saba that in Jewish means 
“bread”.  

He didn’t succeed in finishing regular studies and he soon began to work: he also 
worked as ship’s boy on a merchant ship and was soldier during the first world war.  

Ever since 1903 he began to write poems and, after the war, he bought an antiquarian 
bookshop. This activity allowed him to earn his living and to stay in touch with the 
environment he considered suitable for his literary interests. In 1921 he published the 
Canzoniere, in which he had collected the poems written since his youth without gaining, 
anyway, good remarks by the literay reviewers.  

Because of the racial laws, he was compelled to take refuge in Florence, where 
Eugenio Montale helped and protected him. Some other editions of the Canzoniere were 
published in 1945 and 1945 and this time, they had a great success either by the public or the 
critics. These recognitions, anyway, didn’t avoid him to fall in recurring bouts of depression 
until his death, in 1957.  

His poetry has been highly influenced by his personnel events and vicissitudes, from 
the psychoanalytical treatments to which he had to undergo, to the Central European 
environment of Trieste. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Trieste nel 1883 da madre ebrea, che fu abbandonata dal marito ancora 
prima che il figlio nascesse. Il giovane poeta soffrì molto per questa sua situazione familiare, 
tanto da rifiutare il cognome paterno, che sostituì con Saba, parola che in ebraico significa 
“pane”. 

Non riuscì a compiere studi regolari ed iniziò presto a lavorare: fu anche mozzo su una 
nave mercantile. Fu militare durante la prima guerra mondiale. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    369                            

 

  

Fin dal 1903 aveva iniziato a scrivere poesie e, terminata la guerra, divenne 
proprietario di una libreria a antiquaria. Questa attività gli procurò i mezzi per vivere e 
l’ambiente adatto ai suoi interessi letterari. Nel 1921 pubblicò il suo Canzoniere, nel quale 
aveva raccolto le poesie scritte fin dalla giovinezza, senza ottenere, tuttavia, grande 
apprezzamento dai critici letterari. 

A causa delle leggi razziali si rifugiò a Firenze, dove Montale lo protesse ed aiutò. 
Seguirono altre edizioni del Canzoniere, nel 1945 e1948, che ottennero, finalmente, un grande 
successo di pubblico e di critica. Tali riconoscimenti non gli evitarono, tuttavia, di cadere 
ripetutamente, in forti crisi depressive, fino alla sua morte, avvenuta a Gorizia nel 1957. 

La sua poesia è stata influenzata dalle sue vicende personali, dalle cure psicanalitiche 
alle quali si è dovuto sottoporre e dall’ambiente mitteleuropeo di Trieste. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    370                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

To My Soul 

(1921) 

All’anima mia 

(1921) 
 

You delight in your unending misery. 
Such, my soul, should be the worth of knowledge, 

that your suffering alone should do you good. 
 

Or is the self-deceived the lucky one? 
He who cannot ever know himself 

or the sentence of his condemnation? 
 

Still, my soul, you are magnaminous; 
yet how you thrill to phantom opportunities, 
and so are brought down by a faithless kiss. 

 
To me my misery is a bright summer 

day, where from high up I can make out 
every facet, every detail of the world below. 

 
Nothing is obscure to me; it's all right there, 

wherever my eye or my mind leads me. 
My road is sad but brightened by the sun; 

 
and everything on it, even shadow, is in light. 

 
Translated by:  Katherine Jackson 

 
Dell'inesausta tua miseria godi. 

Tanto ti valga, anima mia, sapere; 
sì che il tuo male, null'altro, ti giovi. 

 
O forse avventurato è chi s'inganna? 

né a se stesso scoprirsi ha in suo potere, 
né mai la sua sentenza lo condanna? 

 
Magnanima sei pure, anima nostra; 
ma per quali non tuoi casi t'esalti, 

sì che un bacio mentito indi ti prostra. 
 

A me la mia miseria è un chiaro giorno 
d'estate, quand'ogni aspetto dagli alti 
luoghi discopro in ogni suo contomo. 

 
Nulla m'è occulto; tutto è sì vicino 

dove l'occhio o il pensiero mi conduce. 
Triste ma sollegiato è il mio cammino; 

 
e tutto in esso, fino l'ombra, è in luce. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    371                            

 

  

[Index] 

Vittorio Sereni (1913 - 1983) 
 

 
 

He was born in Luino in 1913, a pleasant village at the borders between Switzerland 
and Lombardia. He studied in Milan and, just after having begun his activity as a teacher, he 
was recalled for military service because of the outbreak of the second world war and sent to 
Greece.  

In 1941 he published his first collection of verses, Frontiera and, in 1943, he was taken 
prisoner and sent to Algeria for two years; this experience will give inspiration for the poems 
collected in Diario d’Algeria, published in 1947. At the end of the war he returned to Milan, 
where he devoted himself to the activities of teacher and translator until his death, in 1983.  

His literary works are considered one of the most high expressions of lyric poetry of 
our times. His verses are characterized, in the content, by a strong moral tension and, in the 
style, by the research of an essential language, often linked to the concreteness of life and full 
of autobiographical references. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque nel 1913 a Luino, ridente cittadina al confine tra la Svizzera e la Lombardia. 
Studiò a Milano ed aveva appena cominciato la sua carriera di insegnante, quando fu 
richiamato alle armi, per lo scoppio della seconda guerra mondiale, ed inviato in Grecia. 

Nel 1941 pubblicò la sua prima raccolta di versi, Frontiera, e nel 1943 fu fatto 
prigioniero ed inviato per due anni in Algeria, esperienza che gli ispirerà le poesie raccolte in 
Diario d’Algeria, del 1947. Terminata la guerra, tornerà a Milano, dove si dedicherà 
all’attività di insegnante e traduttore fino alla morte, avvenuta nel 1983.  

La sua opera viene considerata una delle più elevate espressioni di poesia lirica del 
nostro tempo. I suoi versi sono caratterizzati, nel contenuto, da una forte tensione morale e, 
nella forma, dalla ricerca di un linguaggio essenziale, spesso legato alla concretezza della vita, 
con molti elementi autobiografici. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    372                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The beach 

(1965) 

La spiaggia 

(1965) 
 

They’ve all gone away - 
the voice was blathering down the receiver 

Then, knowingly: - They’ll not return -. 
  

But today 
on this stretch of beach never visited before 

those sunlight patches… Signals 
of theirs, who hadn't left at all? 

And when you turn they’re quiet, as if nothing. 
  

What’s being wasted from day to day 
is not the dead, but it’s those 

patches of the nonexistent, lime or ashes 
ready to become light and movement. 

Don’t 
be in doubt, - the sea’s strength assails me - 

speak they will. 

Translated by: Marcus Perryman and Peter Robinson 

 
Sono andati via tutti - 

Blaterava la voce dentro il ricevitore. 
E poi, saputa: - Non torneranno più - 

 
Ma oggi 

Su questo tratto di spiaggia mai prima visitato 
Quelle toppe solari... Segnali 

Di loro che partiti non erano affatto? 
E zitti quelli al tuo voltarti, come niente fosse. 

 
I morti non è quel che di giorno 
In giorno va sprecato, ma quelle 

Toppe di inesistenza, calce o cenere 
Pronte a farsi movimento e luce. 

Non 
Dubitare, - m'investe della sua forza il mare - 

Parleranno. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    373                            

 

  

[Index] 

Ignazio Silone (1900 - 1978) 
 

 
 

Ignazio Silone was born in 1900 in Piscina dei Marsi in the region of Abruzzo, in a 
family of modest landlords which was destroyed by an earthquake in 1915. He abandoned his 
studies to commit himself to the political activity. First he joined the socialist party and then 
he took part in the foundation of the communist party in 1921 in Livorno.  

He lived as if he was in exile during the fascist dictatorship and went on several trips 
to the Soviet Union denouncing the extremely sad conditions in which the Italians lived in 
those years. In 1930 after he got to know also Stalin’s dictatorship, he left the communist 
party and moved to Switzerland where in 1933 he published the romance Fontamara, which 
was translated in 30 different languages and assured him worldwide popularity.  

Afterwards he published Vino e pane and Il seme sotto la neve. In 1945, at the end of 
the war, he came back to Italy and took part in the constituent assembly as a representative of 
the socialist party. In those years he started to interpret the Socialism his own way in the light 
of the Christian beliefs which he went into deeper and deeper till his death happened in 
Geneva in 1978.  

His works Il segreto di Luca and Avventura di un povero cristiano are quite 
meaningful from the faith point of view. In the latter the author goes through the Pope 
Celestino V’s life who renounced the pontificate in order to live in poverty and ascesis. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Ignazio Silone, il cui vero nome era Secondo Tranquilli, nacque nel 1900 a Pescina dei 
Marsi, in Abruzzo, da una famiglia di piccoli proprietari terrieri che fu distrutta dal terremoto 
del 1915. Egli abbandonò gli studi per dedicarsi all’attività politica, aderendo prima al Partito 
Socialista e poi partecipando alla storica fondazione del Partito Comunista nel 1921, a 
Livorno. 

Visse da esule durante la dittatura fascista, compiendo numerosi viaggi nell’Unione 
Sovietica e denunciando le tristi condizioni di vita degli Italiani in quegli anni. Nel 1930, 
avendo conosciuto anche la dittatura di Stalin, uscì dal partito comunista e si stabilì in 
Svizzera, dove, nel 1933 pubblicò il romanzo Fontamara , che fu tradotto in trenta lingue e gli 
assicurò fama internazionale.  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    374                            

 

  

Successivamente pubblicò Vino e pane e Il seme sotto la neve. Nel 1945, terminata al 
guerra, rientrò in Italia e partecipò, come rappresentante del Partito Socialista, ai lavori 
dell’Assemblea Costituente. In questi anni iniziò una sua personale interpretazione del 
Socialismo alla luce dei valori cristiani, che egli approfondì fino alla morte, avvenuta a 
Ginevra nel 1978. 

Molto significative, dal punto di vista della fede, le opere Il segreto di Luca ed 
Avventura di un povero cristiano. In questa ultima l’autore ripercorre la vicenda umana di 
Papa Celestino V che, per restare fedele alla sua scelta di povertà ed alla sua vocazione 
all’ascesi, rinunciò al pontificato. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    375                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

from "Fontamara" 

(1933) 

da "Fontamara" 

(1933) 
 

Fontamara is the most famous novel written by Silone. It 
has been translated into many languages and it describes a 
world of farmers, peasants who are poor and desperate, and 

cannot change their conditions of living. Fontamara is an 
underdeveloped village; its inhabitants will never take part in 
the external world, The vision is very pessimistic as it arises 

from those words above.  
It is widely accepted that Fontamara,  exercised 

extraordinary influence as a document of anti-Fascist 
propaganda outside Italy in the late 1930s. The persuasive 

force of the novel in that period was recently recalled by 
Michael Foot, the veteran British Labour politician, who 

wrote that 
"ever since the murder of the socialist leader, Giacomo 
Matteotti, in 1924, no real excuse existed for those who 

could not publish or face the truth. But fiction can sometimes 
speak more strongly than fact. For some of us, Fontamara 

planted a more indelible impression than any 
other report from that scene of tyranny and terror." 

Fontamara, it is clear, played a major role in discrediting 
Mussolini's regime in the eyes of a wide readership hitherto 

not reached, or not persuaded, by the reports from 
journalists in the less conservative press of the 

vacuousness 
of Fascist rhetoric and the viciousness of its practice. But 

just as remarkable as the specific political role that the novel 
played in that time andcontext, and much less noticed by 

literary historians, is the way in whichFontamara was 
subsequently to prove itself to be highly polyvalent, not 

merely in the sense that it came to be interpreted in different 
keys, butalso in that it has engaged with political history in a 

number of different ways, as it has come to be read at 

 
«In capo a tutti c'è Dio, padrone del cielo. 

Questo ognuno lo sa. 
Poi viene il principe di Torlonia, padrone della terra. 

Poi vengono le guardie del principe. 
Poi vengono i cani delle guardie del principe. 

Poi, nulla. 
Poi, ancora nulla. 
Poi, ancora nulla. 

Poi vengono i cafoni. 
E si può dire ch'è finito.» 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    376                            

 

  

several distinct moments and locations over almost sixty 
years. 

Ignazio Silone wrote Fontamara in Switzerland during 1930 
and1931, mostly in a sanatorium, after eight years of 

clandestine anti-Fascist activity, inside and outside Italy, as 
an important official of theItalian Communist Party. Although 
an Italian edition was published inParis in 1934, and a few 

copies did circulate among anti-Fascists in Italy. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    377                            

 

  

[Index] 

Sergio Solmi (1899 - 1981) 
 

 
 

He was born in Rieti in 1899 and devoted himself, since he was still very young, to the 
poetic activity, choosing to keep independent with reference to the literary movements of his 
time. He actively collaborated to the Rivoluzione liberale of Gobetti, translated foreign works 
and wrote essays about the French Revolution, published in 1942.  

He also edited a collection of science fiction novels, Le meraviglie del possibile, the 
preface of which has been very useful for the knowledge and dissemination of this literary 
genre.  

The collections of his poems, such as Fine di stagione, 1933, are characterized by a 
classical, elegant and neat form, although pervaded by a strong intellectual and sentimental 
strain which recalls the Leopardi’s poems. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Rieti nel 1899 e si dedicò, fin da giovane, all’attività poetica. Ha scelto di 
restare indipendente dalle correnti letterarie del tempo. Ha collaborato attivamente alla 
Rivoluzione liberale di Gobetti. Ha tradotto opere e scritto saggi sulla letteratura francese, 
pubblicati nel 1942. 

Ha curato una raccolta di scritti di fantascienza, Le meraviglie del possibile, la cui 
prefazione è stata utilissima per la conoscenza e la diffusione di questo genere letterario. 

Le raccolte delle sue poesie, come Fine di stagione, del 1933, sono caratterizzate da 
una forma classica, elegante e composta, anche se pervasa da una forte tensione intellettuale e 
sentimentale, che ricorda, talvolta, le liriche leopardiane. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    378                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

Prayer to life 

(1956) 

Preghiera alla vita 

(1956) 
 

This poetry celebrates life and all emotions that life brings 
along. The style is elegant and classical and the contrast 

between the equilibrium of the linguistic form and the 
content which is extremely deep and emotionally strong 

makes the experience of life even more vividly gone 
through. Solmi in his involving style sometimes recalls 

Leopardi’s lyrics. 
His poetry, on the one end is strictly linked to the linguistic 

history  of the twentieth century (he is in fact in the middle of 
the path which, starting from the “crepuscular”, leads to the 

“hermetics”);  on the other hand  is scarred by the deep 
trouble  of a man who looks for an afterlife. The poet is the 

voice and the testimony of  his overthrow times, by clarifying 
with determination,  responsibilities and positions and by 
putting in his work, his consciousness, his judgement, his    

painful participation.   
Solmi, in an interview, defined his ideal of  poet like this: “a 
poetry integrally pertaining men, whose music is the breath 

of voice, whose rhythm  is the game of muscles, the pulse of 
blood, the expanding of the chest in the breathing. A poetry 
forcefully defined, made by precise words, in the sentences 
of  which we can find a feeling and  a passionate and active 
thought. A poetry which can’t refrain  from tradition because 
tradition has been elaborated from the structure itself of the 

man in the course of history”. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
Perché più bruci, per meglio sentirti,  

perché sempre il cuor mi divida  
il tuo taglio assetato di lama,  

perché la notte smanioso  
invano a cercarti io mi dibatta  

e mi raggiunga l'alba  
come una morte amica,  

tregua non darmi, mia vita,  
lasciami l'umiliata povertà,  

le nere insonnie, le cure ed i mali.  
Lasciami il delirante desiderio  

che si gonfia in miraggi  
e il timido sangue che s'agita ad ogni  

soffio.  
Perché più bruci, per meglio sentire  

questo tuo bacio che torce e scolora,  
ogni mia fibra consuma al tuo fuoco,  
ogni pensiero soggioga ed annulla,  
ogni tuo dolce, la pace e la gioia,  

negami ancora. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    379                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa (1896 - 1957) 
 

 
 

He was born in Sicily, in Palermo in 1896, into an aristocratic family; he married a 
princess interested in psychoanalysis studies and this surely contributed to his constant and 
sharp observation of the multiform human nature.  

He took part to both the world wars and only in the last years of his file he devoted 
himself to the fiction, so that his masterpiece “The Gattopardo” had a posthumous 
publication.  

His literary style recalls, in part, the Realism of Giovanni Verga (in particular the 
descriptions of their homeland, Sicily); yet, it also anticipates the Decadentism movement, as 
in his narration there is the sense of a slow but ineluctable and ruinous decline of the social 
class and island to which the author belongs, both doomed by their immobilism.  

He died in Rome in 1957, after having seen the birth of the Italian Republic in 1946. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque in Sicilia, a Palermo, nel 1896, da una famiglia aristocratica, e sposò una 
principessa studiosa di psicanalisi, che certamente contribuì al suo costante atteggiamento di 
acutissimo osservatore della multiforme realtà umana. 

Partecipò ad entrambe le guerre mondiali e solo negli ultimi anni della sua vita si 
dedicò alla narrativa, tanto che il suo celebre romanzo, “Il Gattopardo”, è stato pubblicato 
postumo. 

Il suo stile letterario ricorda, in parte, il Verismo del Verga (in particolare per le 
descrizioni della loro stessa terra di Sicilia), ma, ancor più, anticipa il Decadentismo per il 
senso di una lenta, ma inevitabile, fatale rovina della classe sociale e dell’isola alla quale 
l’autore appartiene, condannate entrambe dal loro immobilismo.  

Morì a Roma nel 1957, dopo aver visto, nel 1946, la nascita della Repubblica Italiana. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    380                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The leopard 

(1958) 

Il Gattopardo 

(1958) 
 

The most important work of this writer is the novel “Il 
Gattopardo” , in which it is described the decaying beauty of 
a noble Sicilian family. The protagonist, the prince of Salina, 
watches helplessly the changes that history imposes to his 
island: from the annexation to the Piedmont kingdom to the 
prevailing of the middle class, represented by ordinary but 

rich people. The background of these events is Sicily, 
showed as a land rich in contrasts, flooded by sun and 

strong passions. 
Most of the novel is set during the time of the Italian 

Risorgimento, specifically during the period when Garibaldi, 
the hero of Italian unification, swept through Sicily with his 

forces, known as the Thousands. As the novel opens in 
1860, Garibaldi's Redshirts are about to topple the Kingdom 
of the Two Sicilies, completing the unification of Italy. Don 
Fabrizio finds the corpse of a government soldier killed by 
the Redshirts on his property, forcing him to acknowledge 
the coming change in Sicilian society, even as his family 

continues its empty aristocratic life in blissful ignorance.We 
meet Tancredi Falconeri, the son of Don Fabrizio's sister. 
Tancredi is handsome and witty, with grand ambitions but 
no fortune behind him to allow him to fulfill his goals. With 

the family at their summer retreat in Donnafugata, Tancredi 
appears set to wed his cousin (and Don Fabrizio's 

daughter), Concetta, when he sees Angelica Sedàra, a girl 
of seventeen who has just returned to Donnafugata after 

four years at a finishing school in Florence. Formerly 
awkward and unpolished, Angelica is now a stunning beauty 

and exhibits a formal if somewhat superficial polish that 
more than suffices to catch Tancredi's eye. The two 

immediately begin a courtship that includes several walks 
through the unused and decaying rooms of the Salina family 

 
“…La mattina dopo il sole illuminò il Principe rinfrancato. 
Aveva preso il caffè ed in veste da camera rossa fiorata 

di nero si radeva dinanzi allo specchietto.  Bendicò 
poggiava il testone  pesante sulla sua pantofola.  Mentre 
si radeva la guancia destra, vide nello specchio, dietro 

la sua, la faccia di un giovanotto, un volto magro distinto 
con un’espressione di timorosa beffa. Non si voltò e 
continuò a radersi. “Tancredi, cosa hai combinato la 

notte scorsa?”. “Buongiorno zio. Cosa ho combinato? 
Niente di niente: sono stato con gli amici. Una notte 

santa. Non come certe conoscenze mie che sono state 
a divertirsi a Palermo”……”Ma perché sei vestito così? 
Cosa c’è? Un ballo in maschera di mattina?”. Il ragazzo 

era diventato serio: il suo volto triangolare assunse 
un’inaspettata espressione virile. “Parto zione, parto tra 

un’ora. Sono venuto a dirti addio”. Il povero Salina si 
sentì stringere il cuore. “Un duello?”. “Un grande duello, 

zio. Un duello con Franceschiello Dio Guardi. Vado0 
nelle montagne a Ficuzza; non lo dire a nessuno, 

soprattutto non a Paolo. Si preparano grandi cose, zio, 
ed io non voglio restare a casa. Dove del resto mi 

acchiapperebbero subito se vi restassi”. … “Sei pazzo 
figlio mio. Andare a mettersi con quella gente. Sono tutti 
mafiosi e imbroglioni. Un Falconeri dev’essere con noi, 

per il Re”. Gli occhi  ripresero a sorridere. “Per il Re, 
certo, ma per quale Re?”. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    381                            

 

  

palace, providing the reader with a metaphorical rendering 
of the decline of the Italian aristocracy's importance and 

moral relevance. 
As the novel progresses, Don Fabrizio finds himself in an 

existential crisis that none of his family members or 
confidants can understand; aristocracy was once its own 

reason for being, but with that gone, what is Don Fabrizio's 
purpose in life? Tancredi's marriage to Angelica serves as a 

symbol of the transfer of power from the patrician to the 
plebeian, from the privileged to the opportunistic. The text is 
littered with hints that Tancredi and Angelica's marriage was 
not altogether a happy one, but was a productive one for the 

ambitions of both of its participants. 
As the novel winds to a close, we see Don Fabrizio in his 
death throes, contemplating not his own future but that of 
his family and his life. The novel ends in 1910  with the 

Salina line reaching its end with Concetta, now a spinster in 
her 70s, conversing with the widowed Angelica and 

ultimately deciding to discard long-held material 
possessions that were reminders of her family's past, long 

since rendered irrelevant by history. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    382                            

 

  

[Index] 

Federigo Tozzi (1883 - 1920) 
 

 
 

He was born in Siena in 1883 and his childhood was very sad for his mother’s death 
and oppressed by his father’s up-bringing which was tough and authoritarian. He grew up 
with a very reserved character and a tormented sensitivity which made it difficult for him to 
study regularly but for his devotion to literature.  

When his father died, thank to the heritage received, was in the position to marry a 
very well educated lady as well as to have a house in the countryside where he could 
dedicated himself to the ancient and medieval authors among whom there was Santa Caterina.  

In 1914 he moved to Roma where he met Pirandello and published his best romance 
Con gli occhi chiusi pervaded with autobiographical references and rich of psychological 
analysis of his characters which will be one of the major aspects of the great narrators in the 
following century. He died very young in 1920. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Siena nel 1883 e visse un’infanzia oppressa dalla figura paterna, rude ed 
eccessivamente autoritaria, e rattristata dalla morte della madre. Crebbe con un carattere 
chiuso ed una sensibilità tormentata, che gli impedirono di frequentare studi regolari, ma non 
di dedicarsi alla letteratura. 

Alla morte del padre, grazie all’eredità ricevuta, poté sposare una ragazza colta e 
gentile, stabilirsi in una tranquilla residenza di campagne e dedicarsi serenamente allo studio 
degli autori antichi e del medioevo senese, fra i quali predilesse Santa Caterina. 

Nel 1914 si trasferì a Roma, dove entrò in contatto con Pirandello e pubblicò il suo 
migliore romanzo Con gli occhi chiusi, pervaso di riferimenti autobiografici e ricco di analisi 
psicologiche dei personaggi, che saranno una delle maggiori caratteristiche dei grandi 
narratori del ‘900. Si spense prematuramente nel 1920. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    383                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

From “Three crosses” 

(1920) 

Da “Tre croci” 

(1920) 
 

This piece of writing is taken from “Tre Croci” a novel  that 
Tozzi published in 1920. It was even more successful than 
the previous one ‘Con gli occhi chiusi’ which had actually 
more lyrical and elegant traits. This romance develops in 

very sad lines but it is epic and for this reason it is also very 
attractive for the readers. This piece of writing describes 

Siena, Tozzi’s home-town and it is the protagonist of many 
scenes where the characters move and act. Here we can 

identify the sadness coming from the conflicting relationship 
that Tozzi had with Siena which is fascinating but at the 

same time does not offer any opportunity to inhabitants and 
great men. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
“Il vento frusciava nei giardini e negli orti a piedi delle 
case, dentro la cinta delle mura di Siena. Si sentiva 

chiudere qualche persiana sbattendo; e c'era un piccolo 
eco affilato e rauco che ripeteva pazientemente in fondo 

agli orti quel rumore; come se andasse ad appiattirsi 
laggiù; dove gli archi della fonte di Follonica s'interrano 
fino a mezzo; impiastricciati di muschi che si sfanno con 

il tartaro dell'acquiccia. L'erta delle case, silenziose, 
morte, non sentiva le foglie di un gran tiglio, sotto la 

finestra della camera, staccarsi l'una dopo l'altra, senza 
che potessero smettere più” 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    384                            

 

  

[Index] 

Trilussa (1871 - 1950) 
 

 
 

He was born in Rome in 1871, in a poor family. He didn’t like the classic and 
traditional culture and, since he was very young, he devoted himself to the poetry in dialect.  

In his several poems collections (such as Favole romanesche,1900, Ommini e 
bestie,1908, Lupi ed agnelli, 1919, La gente,1927) he passed from the moralizing tale, which 
recalls Esopo, to the witty and sometimes ironical criticism of his age customs.  

One of the his works is the commentary of about fifty years of Italian life (with some 
predilection for Rome) from the Giolitti’s age to the Fascism until the post war period.  

In his verses we can sometimes feel a subtle melancholy, from which he immediately 
runs away by turning to some ironical witticism. He became more and more famous also 
because he used to read his own verses in public, either in Italy or abroad. He died in Rome in 
1950, few months after having had the honour to be appointed senator for life by the Republic 
President Einaudi. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

Nacque a Roma nel 1871, da famiglia di condizioni modeste. Non amò la cultura 
tradizionale e fin da giovane si dedicò alla poesia dialettale. 

Nelle sue diverse raccolte di poesie (come Favole romanesche, del 1900, Ommini e 
bestie, del1908, Lupi ed agnelli, del 1919, La gente, del 1927) passò dalla favoletta 
moraleggiante, che ricorda Esopo, alla critica arguta, talvolta ironica, dei costumi del suo 
tempo. 

Egli ha commentato circa cinquanta anni della vita italiana (con una certa predilezione 
per Roma), dall’epoca di Giolitti, al fascismo, agli anni del dopoguerra. 

Talvolta si avverte nei suoi versi una sottile malinconia, dalla quale egli subito sfugge 
ricorrendo a battute ironiche. Divenne popolarissimo, anche perché egli amava leggere 
personalmente i suoi versi, sia in Italia che all’estero. Morì a Roma nel 1950, pochi mesi dopo 
aver avuto l’onore di essere nominato senatore a vita da Einaudi. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    385                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The injustices of the world 

(1927) 

L'ingiustizzie der monno 

(1927) 
 

This poem is a statement of how unfair the world is in terms 
of how people who commit the same bad actions are treated 
by society depending on whether they are from high society 

or from very low class. The fortune of Trilussa, near the 
public, is exceptional. His poetry has been fully  successful, 
in particular during his life when poetry, after having been 

symbolistic and crepuscular, spoke a language very far from 
the comprehension of the readers. 

Trilussa’s poetry is evidently rooted in a middle-class 
mentality, but it is surely illustrated by values of prudence, 
moderation, common sense, as well as anti-intellectualism 
and prudery which, generally are associated to the middle-

class mentality.  
The centrality of the political theme, or of  satire against 

politics, come from these values and it is easy to blame the 
poet for indifferentism. His modernity lies in the naturalness 
with whom, behind those subtle middle-class banalities and 

the disbelief and protest clichés, his poetry becomes the 
mouthpiece of an implicit mood, of the hopeless 

dissatisfaction and resignation, the flag of those who 
continue to have a nagging doubt  that moderation and 

wisdom, even important, aren’t enough. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Quanno che senti di' "cleptomania"  
è segno ch'è un signore ch'ha rubbato:  
er ladro ricco è sempre un ammalato  
e er furto che commette è una pazzia.  

  
Ma se domani è un povero affamato  
che rubba una pagnotta e scappa via  

pe' lui nun c'è nessuna malatia  
che j'impedisca d'esse condannato!  

  
Così va er monno! L'antra settimana  
che Yeta se n'agnede cór sartore1  

tutta la gente disse: - È una puttana. -  
  

Ma la duchessa, che scappò in America  
cór cammeriere de l'ambasciatore,  

- Povera donna! - dissero - È un'isterica!...  
  

1Fuggì col sarto. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    386                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giuseppe Ungaretti (1888 - 1970) 
 

 
 

He was born in 1888 in Alessandria d’Egitto, of Italian parents, who came from 
Lucca. In 1912 he left Africa and moved to Paris in order to continue his studies at the 
Sorbonne University.  

In the lively cultural circles of the French capital, he knew and got inv touch with 
Apollinaire, Bergson and Picasso. At the looming of the first world war, he came back to 
Italy, where he sided with the interventionists, volunteered and was sent to fight on the Carso 
at first and at the French front later.  

The tragic experience of the war and of the trench life will inspire him with the poems 
collected in Il porto sepolto, which later will come together in the Allegria di naufragi, in 
1919. 

The verses of this compositions are simple, bare and without punctuation, in contrast 
with the rhetoric of D’Annunzio which dominated at those times; for this they are considered 
as one of the most elevated expressions of the Hermetic movement .  

Afterwards he went through a deep spiritual crisis but he overcame it, achieving a 
deeper Christian faith. In the collection of poems, the Sentimento del tempo, 1933, in which 
he faces the sorrow in its collective dimension he came back to the traditional metrics and use 
of the punctuation.  

From 1936 to 1942 the taught Italian Literature in the University of San Paul, Brazil. 
In this period his nine years old son died and this tragedy will give him the inspiration for Il 
dolore (The sorrow), a collection of poems dedicated to the considerations about death and 
sorrow, in their individual dimensions. He lived, finally, some years of intense literary 
activity in Milan, where he passed away in 1970. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque nel 1888 ad Alessandria d’Egitto, da genitori italiani, originari di Lucca. Nel 
1912 lasciò l’Africa e si trasferì a Parigi, per poter proseguire i suoi studi alla Sorbona. 

Nel fervido ambiente culturale della capitale francese poté conoscere Apollinaire, 
Bergson e Picasso. Al profilarsi della prima guerra mondiale tornò in Italia, si schierò con gli 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    387                            

 

  

interventisti, si arruolò come volontario e fu inviato a combattere prima sul Carso e poi sul 
fronte Francese.  

L’esperienza tragica della guerra e della vita in trincea gli ispirerà le poesie de Il porto 
sepolto, che poi confluiranno nell’Allegria di naufragi, del 1919. 

I versi di questi componimenti sono semplici, scarni e privi di punteggiatura, in 
contrasto con la retorica dannunziana, dominante in quella epoca, e vengono considerati una 
delle più elevate espressioni dell’Ermetismo. 

Successivamente attraversò una profonda crisi spirituale, che riuscì a superare 
tornando ad una più profonda fede cristiana. Nella raccolta di poesie il Sentimento del tempo, 
del 1933, in cui affronta il dolore nella sua dimensione collettiva, egli torna alla metrica 
tradizionale ed all’uso della punteggiatura. 

Dal 1936 al 1942 insegnò Letteratura Italiana in Brasile, all’Università di S. Paolo. In 
questo periodo perse il figlio Antonietto di soli nove anni, esperienza che gli ispirò Il dolore, 
raccolta di poesie dedicate alla riflessione sulla morte e sulla sofferenza nella sua dimensione 
individuale. Visse infine intensi anni di attività letteraria a Milano, dove si spense nel 1970. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    388                            

 

  

[Index] 

Rivers 

(1931) 

I fiumi 

(1931) 
 

This mutilated tree gives 
Me support, left in this pot-hole 
It has the bitterness of a circus 

Before or after the show. 
I watch 

The quiet passage of 
Clouds over the moon. 

This morning I stretched 
Myself in an urn of water, 
Like a relic, and rested. 

The Isonzo scoured 
Me like 

One of its stones. 
I pulled my four 
limbs together, 

And went, like an acrobat, 
Over the water. 

Crouched by my clothes 
Fouled with war, I inclined 
My head, like a Bedouin, 

To receive the sun. 
This is the Isonzo. 

And it is there I 
Most see myself 
In the universe 

A compliant 
Thread. 

My pain is 
When I do not believe 

Myself in harmony. 
But those hidden 

Hands give as they knead me 
A rare joy. 

I have relived 

 
Mi tengo a quest’albero mutilato 
Abbandonato in questa dolina 

Che ha il languore 
Di un circo 

Prima o dopo lo spettacolo 
E guardo 

Il passaggio quieto 
Delle nuvole sulla luna 

Stamani mi sono disteso 
In un’urna d’acqua 

E come una reliquia 
Ho riposato 

L’Isonzo scorrendo 
Mi levigava 

Come un suo sasso 
Ho tirato su 

Le mie quattro ossa 
E me ne sono andato 

Come un acrobata 
Sull’acqua 

Mi sono accoccolato 
Vicino ai miei panni 

Sudici di guerra 
E come un beduino 

Mi sono chinato a ricevere 
Il sole 

Questo è l’Isonzo 
E qui meglio 

Mi sono riconosciuto 
Una docile fibra 

Dell’universo 
Il mio supplizio 

È quando 
Non mi credo 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    389                            

 

  

The stages of my life. 
The Serchio: from 

Which have drawn, perhaps 
For two thousand years 

My country people, my father, 
My mother. 

This is the Nile 
That has seen me be born, 

And grow 
And burn in ignorance on 

Extending plains. 
This is the Seine; and I mingled 
In that muddiness learning each 

Part of all myself. 
These are my rivers confluent 

In the Isonzo. 
This is my nostalgia 

That in each 
One shines through me, now 
It is night, and my life seems 

A budding 
Off of shades 

 
Translation found in: www.ungarettionline.it 

In armonia 
Ma quelle occulte 

Mani 
Che m’intridono 

Mi regalano 
La rara 
Felicità 

Ho ripassato 
Le epoche 

Della mia vita 
Questi sono 
I miei fiumi 

Questo è il Serchio 
Al quale hanno attinto 

Duemil’anni forse 
Di gente mia campagnola 
E mio padre e mia madre. 

Questo è il Nilo 
Che mi ha visto 

Nascere e crescere 
E ardere d’inconsapevolezza 

Nelle distese pianure 
Questa è la Senna 

E in quel suo torbido 
Mi sono rimescolato 

E mi sono conosciuto 
Questi sono i miei fiumi 

Contati nell’Isonzo 
Questa è la mia nostalgia 

Che in ognuno 
Mi traspare 

Ora ch’è notte 
Che la mia vita mi pare 

Una corolla 
Di tenebre 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    390                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giovanni Verga (1840 - 1922) 
 

 
 

Giovanni Verga is the most important and representative Italian Realist writer (in Italy 
called Verismo). Born into a liberal and noble family of Catania in Sicily, he lived for some 
periods in Florence and Milan but, later, he preferred to come back to his home town where 
he died in 1922.  

Animated by patriot feelings, he volunteered in the Garibaldi troops and fought for the 
Unity of Italy.  

Devoted to literature, he wrote his first works according to the Romanticism rules: in 
1871 he wrote “Storia di una capinera”, the story of an impracticable love which will bring 
the hero into madness and death.  

Later, anyway, he will join to the literary movement of the Verism (Realism) and, 
probably as a reaction to the excess of sentimentalism adopted previously, he will adopt the 
literary model of the author’s “impersonality” that is the ability of describing the reality 
without expressing any personal feeling. 

The works which mainly give expression to this literary model are two famous novels 
( “The Malavoglia” and “Mastro don Gesualdo” ) and a lot of short stories whose characters 
are humble, suffering and defeated by the hardness of life (for example the protagonist of the 
short story “Rosso Malpelo”, a character who works, slaves and dies in a solfatara mine, as 
his father before him).  

In his works, the author tackles the social problems which troubled the first decades of 
the Italian Kingdom and brought to death the king Umberto I, killed by an anarchist in 1900 
because of the excessive crudeness with whom the workers revolt had been repressed. The 
style of his works is sober and intense at the same time, and the rhythm recalls the Sicilian 
inflections, the dialects of that island beloved and described by Verga in its most painful 
aspects. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    391                            

 

  

È lo scrittore che più d’ogni altro rappresenta il Verismo in Italia. Nacque a Catania 
nel 1840 da una famiglia di origini nobili e di sentimenti liberali, visse per alcuni periodi a 
Firenze e Milano, ma poi preferì tornare nella sua città natale, dove morì nel 1922. 

Animato da ideali patriottici, si arruolò nelle truppe di Garibaldi e combatté per l’unità 
d’Italia. 

Dedicatosi alla letteratura, scrisse le sue prime opere aderendo al Romanticismo: nel 
1871 scrisse la “Storia di una capinera”, storia di un amore impossibile, che porterà la 
protagonista alla follia ed alla morte. 

Ma, successivamente, egli aderirà alla corrente letteraria del Verismo, e, quasi come 
forma di reazione all’eccessivo sentimentalismo del periodo precedente, adotterà il canone 
letterario della “impersonalità” dell’autore, che deve descrivere la realtà senza esprimere 
alcun sentimento proprio, ma facendolo scaturire dalla narrazione stessa. 

Le opere che esprimono questo ideale letterario sono due romanzi (“I Malavoglia” e 
“Mastro don Gesualdo”) e numerose novelle, che hanno come protagonisti personaggi umili, 
spesso sofferenti e vinti dalla durezza della vita (come il protagonista della novella ”Rosso 
Malpelo” che lavora, fatica e muore nella miniera, come suo padre). 

Lo stile di queste opere è sobrio ed intenso ed il ritmo riprende la cadenza dei dialetti 
siciliani, di quel isola che l’autore amò e volle descrivere nei suoi aspetti più dolenti. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    392                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

The Malavoglia 

(The house by the Medlar Tree) 

Chapter I 

(1881-1882) 

I Malavoglia - cap I 

(1881-1882) 

 
There was a time when the Malavoglia were as thick as the 

stones on the Trezza road. You could find them even at 
Ognina and Aci Castello, all seagoing folks, good, upright, 

the exact opposite  of what you would think from their 
nickname. And this is as it should be. In the parish register 

they were in truth called Toscano but they didn’t mean a 
thing, for ever since this world was a world they’d been 

known from father to son as Malavoglia at Ognina, Trezza, 
and Aci Castello, and they had always had their boats in the 
water and their own roof tiles in the sun.  But now at Trezza 

all that was left on them was master ‘Ntoni, branch of the 
Malavoglia who lived in the house by the medlar tree and 

kept the Provvidenza moored  on the beach below the wash 
shed, alongside Uncle’s Cola Concetta and Master 

Fortunato Cipolla’s big trawler. 
The squalls that had driven the other Malavoglia here, there, 
and everywhere had passes over the house by the medlar 

tree and the boat moored below the wash shed  without 
doing too much damage; and Master ‘Ntoni to explain the 

miracle, used to lift his clenched fist, a fist made like a 
chunk of walnut, and say: “To pull an oar the five fingers 

must work together”.  
He also used to say: “Men are made like the fingers of a 
hand: the thumb  must act as a thumb and the little finger 

must act like a little finger”. 
And Master ‘Ntoni family was truly set out like the fingers of 

a hand. First came the old man himself, the thumb, who 
commanded ehen to feast and when to fast; then his son 
Bastiano, called Bastianazzo because he was so big and 
burly as the St. Christopher painted under the arch of the 

 
…Un tempo i Malavoglia erano stati numerosi come i 

sassi della strada vecchia di Trezza; ce n’erano persino 
ad 0gnina, e ad Aci Castello, tutti buona e brava gente 
di mare, proprio all’opposto di quel che sembrava dal 

nomignolo, come dev’essere. Veramente nel libro della 
parrocchia si chiamavano Toscano, ma questo non 
voleva dir nulla, poiché da che il mondo era mondo, 

all’Ognina, a Trezza e ad Aci Castello, li avevano 
sempre conosciuti per Malavoglia, di padre in figlio, che 
avevano sempre avuto delle barche sull’acqua, e delle 
tegole al sole. Adesso a Trezza non rimanevano che i 

Malavoglia di padron ’Ntoni, quelli della casa del 
nespolo, e della Provvidenza ch’era ammarrata sul 

greto, sotto il lavatoio, accanto alla Concetta dello zio 
Cola, e alla paranza di padron Fortunato Cipolla. 

Le burrasche che avevano disperso di qua e di là gli altri 
Malavoglia, erano passate senza far gran danno sulla 

casa del nespolo e sulla barca ammarrata sotto il 
lavatoio, e padron ’Ntoni, per spiegare il miracolo, 

soleva dire, mostrando il pugno chiuso – un pugno che 
sembrava fatto di legno di noce - Per menare il remo 

bisogna che le cinque dita s’aiutino l’un l’altro. 
Diceva pure, - Gli uomini son fatti come le dita della 
mano: il dito grosso deve far da dito grosso, e il dito 

piccolo deve far da dito piccolo. 
E la famigliuola di padron ’Ntoni era realmente disposta 
come le dita della mano. Prima veniva lui, il dito grosso, 
che comandava le feste e le quarant’ore; poi suo figlio 

Bastiano, Bastianazzo, perché era grande e grosso 
quanto il San Cristoforo che c’era dipinto sotto l’arco 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    393                            

 

  

fish market in the city of Catania; and big and burly as he 
was he’d put about directly when ordered, and wouldn’t ever 
blow his nose without his father say-so. In fact he  had teken 

Maruzza for  a wife when he’d been told to take her. Then 
came La longa, a tiny woman who kept busy weaving, 

salting anchovies and bearing children  like a good 
housewife.  And last the grandchildren, in order of 

age.’Ntoni, the elder, a loafer of twenty, who was still getting 
clouts from his grandfather;  and then a few kicks lower 

down to straighten him when the clouts had been too hard. 
Then Luca who, his grandfather always said, had more good 
sense then his older brother; and Mena, short for Filomena, 
who was nicknamed Saint Agata because she was forever 

at the loom and you know what thry say: Woman at the 
loom, hen in the coop and mullet in Janualry. After Mena 
came Alessio, Alessi for short, a little snot-nose who was 
the splitting image of his grandfather; and finally Lia, short 

for Rosalia, who was not yet  fish, flesh or fowl. On 
Sundays, when they walked into church, one behind the 

other, it looked like a procession… 
 

Translated by: Raymond Rosenthal 

della pescheria della città; e così grande e grosso 
com’era filava diritto alla manovra comandata, e non si 

sarebbe soffiato il naso se suo padre non gli avesse 
detto “sòffiati il naso” tanto che s’era tolta in moglie la 

Longa quando gli avevano detto “pìgliatela ”. Poi veniva 
la Longa, una piccina che badava a tessere, salare le 

acciughe, e far figliuoli, da buona massaia; infine i 
nipoti, in ordine di anzianità: ’Ntoni, il maggiore, un 

bighellone di vent’anni, che si buscava tutt’ora qualche 
scappellotto dal nonno, e qualche pedata più giù per 
rimettere l’equilibrio, quando lo scappellotto era stato 
troppo forte; Luca, “che aveva più giudizio del grande” 
ripeteva il nonno; Mena (Filomena) soprannominata 

“Sant’Agata”, perché stava sempre al telaio, e si suol 
dire “donna di telaio, gallina di pollaio, e triglia di 

gennaio”; Alessi (Alessio) un moccioso tutto suo nonno 
colui!; e Lia (Rosalia) ancora né carne né pesce. - Alla 

domenica, quando entravano in chiesa, l’uno dietro 
l’altro, pareva una processione… 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    394                            

 

  

[Index] 

Elio Vittorini (1908 - 1966) 
 

 
 

He was born in Siracusa in 1908 and followed his father who was a railwayman in all 
his journeys. He grew up with a deep passion for travelling and adventures. During his 
teenage he escaped from home several times interrupted his studies and started to work in 
Gorizia in a construction site.  

In 1927 he married Rosa Quasimodo, the great poets’ sister. Since 1930, he lived in 
Firenze, worked for Nazione, the daily newspaper of the city, and started studying literature 
again as self-taught. He dedicated himself to English and American authors that he translated 
and spread out with Pavese’s contribution too.  

When the war broke out in 1936, he fought on the Republicans’side also writing 
provoking articles against Franco. This caused his expulsion from the Fascist party. In 1938, 
after he moved to Milano, he joined the Communist party and from 1943 onward he took part 
in the fights for Liberation.  

In these years he wrote Conversazione in Sicilia which is one of the most beautiful 
narrative works in 1900 for his high style, and Uomini e no which is a romance speaking 
about his own experience in the Resistance.  

His literature activity open to foreign poems and prose and his desire to renovate the 
Italian culture, caused Togliatti’s disapproval so that he felt obliged to abandon the party.  

He worked very hard till his death which happened in 1966 and collaborated with 
several publishers (Bompiani, Einaudi, Mondadori) and founded some magazines, Politecnico 
and Il Menabò which he ran with Calvino, so that he could spread out the new emerging 
authors of those times. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Siracusa nel 1908 e, seguendo il padre ferroviere nei suoi numerosi 
spostamenti, crebbe acquisendo precocemente l’amore per i viaggi e le avventure. Durante la 
sua adolescenza fuggì più volte da casa, interrompendo gli studi e cominciando a lavorare a 
Gorizia in un cantiere edile. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    395                            

 

  

Nel 1927 sposò Rosa Quasimodo, sorella del grande poeta. Dal 1930 visse a Firenze, 
lavorando alla Nazione, il quotidiano della città, e proseguendo gli studi letterari da 
autodidatta.Si dedicò con passione agli autori inglesi ed americani, che tradusse, contribuendo 
alla loro diffusione insieme a Pavese. 

Nel 1936, allo scoppio della guerra in Spagna, si schierò con i Repubblicani e scrisse 
accesi articoli contro Franco, che gli causarono l’espulsione dal Partito Fascista. Nel 1938, 
trasferitosi a Milano, si iscrisse al Partito Comunista e dal 1943 partecipò alle lotte per la 
Liberazione. 

In questi anni scrisse Conversazione in Sicilia, una delle opere di narrativa più belle 
del ‘900 per l’elevatezza di stile, e Uomini e no, romanzo che racchiude le sue esperienze 
della Resistenza. 

La sua attività letteraria, aperta anche alle opere straniere, ed il suo desiderio di 
rinnovare la cultura italiana, lo esposero alla disapprovazione di Togliatti, rigido censore, 
tanto da indurlo ad abbandonare il Partito Comunista. 

Lavorò instancabilmente fino alla morte, avvenuta nel 1966, collaborando con più 
case editrici (Bompiani, Einaudi, Mondadori) e fondando nuove riviste (il Politecnico e Il 
Menabò, che diresse insieme a Calvino), animato anche dal desiderio costante di far 
conoscere nuovi giovani autori. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    396                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

from “Conversations in Sicily” 
extract from Chapter I (1938-39) 

da “Conversazioni in Sicilia” 
estratto da Capitolo I (1938-39) 

 
“That winter I was in the grip of abstract furies. I won't be 

more specific, that's not what I've set out to tell. But I have 
to say that they were abstract, not heroic, not living; they 
were furies, in some way, for all doomed humanity. This 
went on for a long time, and I went around with my head 

hung low. I saw posters for the newspapers blaring their ads 
and I hung my head; I saw friends for an hour or two without 
saying a word, and I hung my head; and I had a girlfriend or 

wife waiting for me, but even with her I didn't say a word, 
even with her I hung my head. Meanwhile it rained, and 

days passed, months passed; I had holes in my shoes and 
water seeped in, and there was no longer anything else but 
this: rain, massacres in the ad posters for the newspapers, 
water seeping through the holes in my shoes, mute friends, 
life in me like a muffled dream, and a frozen hopelessness.” 

Translated by: Alane Salierno Maso 

 
Io ero, quell'inverno, in preda ad astratti furori. Non dirò 

quali, non di questo mi son messo a raccontare. Ma 
bisogna dica ch'erano astratti, non eroici, non vivi; furori, 
in qualche modo, per il genere umano perduto. Da molto 
tempo questo, ed ero col capo chino. Vedevo manifesti 
di giornali squillanti e chinavo il capo; vedevo amici, per 
un'ora, due ore, e stavo con loro senza dire una parola, 
chinavo il capo; e avevo una ragazza o moglie che mi 

aspettava ma neanche con lei dicevo una parola, anche 
con lei chinavo il capo. Pioveva intanto e passavano i 

giorni, i mesi, e io avevo le scarpe rotte, l'acqua che mi 
entrava nelle scarpe, e non vi era più altro che questo: 

pioggia, massacri sui manifesti dei giornali, e acqua 
nelle mie scarpe rotte, muti amici, la vita in me come un 

sordo sogno, e non speranza, quiete. Questo era il 
terribile: la quiete nella non speranza. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    397                            

 

  

[Index] 

Cristiano Banti (1824 - 1904) 
 

 
 

Born near Pisa in 1824 he was trained near the Academy of Fine Arts of Siena, where 
he mainly devoted himself to the heroic and historical subjects, according to the classical 
style. 

Later he moved to Florence, he joined the Macchiaioli movement and began to paint 
the nature from life, painting in open air and taking his inspiration from the Tuscan country 
beauty. He mainly portrayed country life scenes, characterized by strong chromatic contrasts. 

In the last period of his life, which ended in 1904, his painting became more intimist 
and descriptive of the different moods. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque nei pressi di Pisa nel 1824 e si formò all’Accademia di Siena, dedicandosi a 
soggetti eroici o storici, secondo la tradizione classica. 

Trasferitosi a Firenze, si legò al gruppo dei Macchiaioli ed iniziò a dipingere la Natura 
dal vero, recandosi all’aria aperta ed ispirandosi alla bellezza della campagna toscana. 
Ritrasse scene di vita contadina, caratterizzandole con forti contrasti cromatici.  

Nell’ultimo periodo della sua vita, che si concluse a Firenze nel 1904, la sua pittura 
divenne più intimistica, descrittiva dei diversi stati d’animo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    398                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

In the street to the church 

(1905) 

In via per la chiesa 

(1905) 
 

The painting represents women and children of  Tuscany 
countryside who, in the intense light of a summer afternoon, 

move on the way to the church in order to take part to the 
Vesper. Their gait is solemn and gives dignity to those 

humble peasant lives. The painter dwells on their intense 
faces, as he would transmit  the characters feelings and 

opinions. 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Il quadro ci presenta donne e bambine della campagna 
toscana che, nella luce intensa di un pomeriggio estivo, 

si incamminano verso la chiesa per partecipare alle 
funzioni del Vespro. Il loro incedere è solenne ed 

infonde dignità a quelle umili vite contadine. Il pittore 
sembra soffermarsi sui loro volti dalle espressioni 

intense, quasi a volerci trasmettere i sentimenti e le 
convinzioni profonde di cui appaiono ricche. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    399                            

 

  

[Index] 

Luigi Bechi (1830- 1919) 
 

 
 

This painter had an artistic evolution similar to the one of the other Macchiaioli, since 
he had been, at the beginning of his work, devoted to the traditional painting, linked to the 
historical themes of the past; later he abandoned this kind of style in order to draw the nature 
from life.  

In this he was helped by Diego Martelli who gladly hosted him in his estate in 
Castiglioncello, where Luigi had the opportunity to paint sea landscapes and the work of the 
sandmen.  

He loved to paint the contemporary reality and stood out amongst the other 
Macchiaioli, thanks to his intimism. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Questo pittore ebbe un’evoluzione artistica simile a quella di molti altri Macchiaioli, 
poiché fu inizialmente dedito alla pittura tradizionale, legata ai temi storici del passato, ma in 
seguito l’abbandonò per ritrarre la natura dal vero. 

Fu in questo aiutato da Diego Martelli, che lo ospitava volentieri nella sua tenuta a 
Castiglioncello, dove poté ritrarre paesaggi marini ed il lavoro dei renaioli. 

Amò ritrarre la realtà contemporanea e si distinse dagli altri Macchiaioli per il suo 
intimismo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    400                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

Sandman in Castiglioncello 

(1864) 

Renaiolo a Castiglioncello 

(1864) 
 

The scene of the sandman who, observed by his wife, is 
loading the sea sand onto his cart, can be categorized in the 
particular attention the Macchiaioli put in the humble classes 

heavy work. Anyway the presence, in the painting, of 
several patches of shade announce the evolution of the 

painter towards a kind of depictions more intimist and less 
linked to the social problems. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 
La scena di questo renaiolo che, osservato dalla moglie, 

carica di sabbia del mare il suo carro, si colloca nella 
particolare attenzione del Verismo, tanto caro ai 

Macchiaioli, verso la fatica delle classi più umili. Tuttavia 
la presenza di tante zone d’ombra ci preannuncia 

l’evoluzione che il pittore avrà negli anni successivi, 
dedicandosi a rappresentazioni di tipo più intimistico e 

meno legate alle problematiche sociali. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    401                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giovanni Boldini (1842 - 1931) 
 

 
 

Born in Ferrara in 1842, he studied fine arts in that town, under the guidance of his 
father Antonio. He moved in Florence where, after having attended the Academy of fine arts 
in order to continue his studies, he began to frequent the Macchiaioli meetings. 

Anyway, he took part only for a period to the movement and he moved to Paris, a 
town beloved by the artist, where he lived all life long. He died in 1931. 

This artist is famous in particular for his extraordinary mastery in the painting of 
feminine portraits and for his ability in giving to his pictures the sense of movement. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Ferrara nel 1842 e vi studiò pittura sotto la guida del padre Antonio. Si 
trasferì a Firenze, dove frequentò prima l’Accademia delle Belle Arti e, successivamente, le 
riunioni dei Macchiaioli al Caffé Michelangiolo.  

Egli, tuttavia, aderì solo per un certo periodo a questo movimento artistico, 
trasferendosi poi a Parigi, città che amò moltissimo e nella quale visse fino alla sua morte, 
nel1931.  

Questo pittore è famoso per la sua straordinaria maestria nel dipingere ritratti e nel 
conferire il senso del movimento. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    402                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

Portrait of Carlotta Aloisi Papudoff 

(1869) 

Ritratto di Carlotta Aloisi Papudoff 

(1869) 
 

The upper-class  atmosphere of the painting, with the 
refined yellow silk tapestry and the rich golden frames of the 

pictures, contrasts with the bored and lazy manner of the 
portrayed lady. The artist, influenced by the French school 
painting, gives a great brilliance to his paintings and shows 
a particular artistry in the painting and matching of different 
colours and fabrics. What’s more it results very interesting 

the representation of the state of mind of the depicted 
subjects; in fact his ability of representing the psychological 

 
L’atmosfera signorile di questo quadro, con le raffinate 
tappezzerie di seta gialla e le ricche cornici dorate dei 
quadri, contrasta con l’atteggiamento annoiato, quasi 
indolente, della signora ritratta. L’artista, influenzato 

dalla pittura francese, conferisce una grande luminosità 
ai suoi quadri e dimostra una particolare maestria nel 

dipingere ed accostare tessuti diversi fra di loro, come le 
sete ed i pizzi. Tuttavia è ancora più interessante lo 
studio dello stato d’animo del soggetto, che ha reso 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    403                            

 

  

aspects of his characters has brought great fame to Boldini. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

famoso Boldini par la capacità di intuizione psicologica 
sempre presente nei suoi ritratti. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    404                            

 

  

[Index] 

Odoardo Borrani (1832 - 1905) 
 

 
 

Born in Pisa in 1832, he studied at the Academy of fine arts in Florence where he 
began his painting activity, devoting himself, according to the classical tradition, to historical 
subjects of the past. 

When he knew the Macchiaioli, frequenting the Caffé Michelangiolo, he began to 
paint with them outdoors, showing a great chromatic sensibility. 

In addition to the naturalistic work, he liked to portray the contemporary history with 
scenes full of love of his country, represented sometimes in the privacy of the homes.  

He passed away in Florence in 1905. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Pisa nel 1832 e si formò all’Accademia delle Belle Arti di Firenze, dove 
iniziò la sua attività dedicandosi, secondo la tradizione classica, a soggetti storici del passato. 

Quando conobbe i Macchiaioli, frequentando il Caffé Michelangiolo, iniziò a 
dipingere con loro all’aria aperta, mostrando una grande sensibilità cromatica. 

Oltre alle opere di tipo naturalistico, amò rappresentare la storia contemporanea, con 
scene piene d’amore patrio vissuto talvolta anche nell’intimità delle pareti domestiche. 

Si spense a Firenze nel 1905. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    405                            

 

  

[Index] 

 
 

Sewers of red shirts 

(1863) 

Cucitrici di camicie rosse 

(1863) 
 

The painting shows the link between the Macchiaioli and the 
history of that period. The scene is set in a middle- class 
sitting-room, in which some young women are sewing the 

red shirts for the soldier who would have fought with 
Garibaldi in the famous “expedition of the Thousand”. The 
atmosphere, clear and accurate, is pervaded by a tender 

melancholy, due either  to the fear for the possible failure of 
the action, or to the consciousness to be in the evening  of 
that kind feminine industriousness doomed to be killed by 

the progress rhythms. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Questo quadro ci presenta il legame tra i Macchiaioli e 
la Storia a loro contemporanea. 

La scena si colloca in un salotto borghese, in cui si sono 
riunite alcune giovani donne a cucire le camicie per i 

soldati che avrebbero seguito Garibaldi nella spedizione 
dei Mille. L’atmosfera, limpida ed accurata, è pervasa da 

una tenera malinconia, in parte dovuta all’immediato 
fallimento dell’impresa, in parte al vicino tramontare di 

quella gentile operosità femminile che non avrebbe retto 
ai nuovi ritmi imposti dal progresso. 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    406                            

 

  

[Index] 

Vincenzo Cabianca (1827 - 1901) 
 

 
 

He is one of the Macchiaioli painters who arrived in Florence from other regions,-
fascinated by the cultural ardour and the atmosphere breathed in the town. 

He was born in Verona in 1827 and there he had begun the study of fine arts, later 
pursuing it in the Academy of Venice. 

Once reached the group of Tuscan Macchiaioli, he abandoned the traditional style and 
devoted himself to the sea landscapes and sunny scenes, painted with vigorous chromatic 
sensitivity. 

Later he moved to Rome, where he died in 1901, turning himself to the watercolour 
and reproducing more soft and smooth colours. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

È uno dei Macchiaioli che sono giunti a Firenze da altre regioni, attratto dal clima di 
fervore culturale che vi si respirava.  

Era nato a Verona nel1827 e vi aveva iniziato lo studio della pittura, proseguendolo 
poi all’Accademia di Venezia. 

Entrato a far parte del gruppo dei pittori toscani, abbandonò lo stile tradizionale e si 
dedicò a paesaggi marini e scene assolate, che raffigurò con una vigorosa sensibilità 
cromatica. 

Trasferitosi a Roma, dove morì nel1901, si dedicò all’acquarello, rendendo i suoi 
colori più fluidi e morbidi. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    407                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

The spintress 

(1862) 

La filatrice 

(1862) 
 

The pictorial composition represents the three ages of the 
human life on the background of a flayed wall of an humble 
country house. Even though the atmosphere is linked to the 

Naturalism and its  social aspects, we can observe some 
symbolic elements such as the light which brightens 

childhood and youth and the shadow on the old age. The 
symbol the spindle from which the thread of life unravels is 

even more meaningful. 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Questa composizione pittorica ci presenta le tre età 
della vita umana sullo sfondo del muro scortecciato di 

un’umile casa contadina. Sebbene l’ambiente sia legato 
al verismo ed alle sue scelte sociali, si notano anche 
alcuni elementi simbolici, quali la luce che illumina 

l’infanzia e la giovinezza e l’ombra che scende sulla 
vecchiaia. Ancor più significativo il simbolo della 

conocchia dal quale scende e si dipana il filo della vita. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    408                            

 

  

[Index] 

Giovanni Fattori (1825 - 1908) 
 

 
 

Born in Livorno in 1825, he is considered the major representative of the Macchiaioli 
movement. He frequented for long the Caffé Michelangiolo in Florence; later he travelled to 
Paris (where he got acquainted with Monet), to London, to Dresda and to Philadelphia, 
broadening this way his artistic horizons and remaining, at the same time, very tied to the 
landscapes of his Tuscany.  

He used to paint his pictures with strong contrasts light-shade and blazing chromatic 
areas. In particular his favourite subjects were the military life scenes linked to the Italian 
independence wars, the Maremma landscapes and the life in the countryside.  

He joined the Realism, sharing the concept of Art as representation of nature and 
social engagement. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque e Livorno nel 1825 ed è considerato il maggior rappresentante del gruppo dei 
Macchiaioli. A Firenze frequentò a lungo il Caffè Michelangiolo; successivamente si recò a 
Parigi (dove conobbe Manet), a Londra, a Dresda ed a Filadelfia, ampliando i propri orizzonti 
artistici, ma restando sempre legato ai paesaggi della sua Toscana. 

Egli costruiva i propri quadri con forti contrasti luce-ombra ed accese zone 
cromatiche. Amò rappresentare scene di vita militare, legate alle Guerre d’Indipendenza, 
paesaggi della Maremma ed il lavoro dei campi.  

Aderì al Realismo e ne condivise la concezione dell’Arte come rappresentazione della 
Natura ed impegno sociale. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    409                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

The macchiaiole 

(1865) 

Le macchiaiole 

(1865) 
 

The scene represent a moment of the humble life of some 
farm workers that, gathered the hay for animals, get moving 

home, at nightfall. The characters have been chosen in 
marked contrast to that period predilection for the depiction 

of the great  characters of history. The great care with whom 
the characters have been painted and placed in the 

landscape, recall the academic studies made by the author 
 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 
Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Questa scena rappresenta un momento dell’umile vita di 
alcune contadine che, raccolto il fieno per gli animali, si 

avviano verso casa al calar della sera. I personaggi 
sono stati scelti in contrasto con la predilezione per i 
grandi della Storia, tipica delle Accademie di pittura. 
Tuttavia la cura con cui le figure sono state dipinte e 

collocate nel paesaggio ricorda proprio gli studi 
accademici compiuti dall’autore. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    410                            

 

  

[Index] 

Silvestro Lega (1826 - 1895) 
 

 
 

Born near Forlì in 1826, he studied at the Academy of fine arts in Florence where he 
was trained according to the classical models. Heated by a deep patriotism and republican 
ideals, he volunteered and fought for the independence of Italy. 

In Florence he got in touch with the Macchiaioli and joined them, settling in 
Piacentina, on the hills which surround the town, where this group of painters drew the nature 
from life. 

His work is so linear and bright that it recalls the Tuscan painting school of the 1400. 
His paintings are today deemed of great value, but he closed his life in Florence in 1895, in 
humble economical conditions, supported and hosted by his faithful friends. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque vicino a Forlì nel 1826 e studiò all’Accademia delle Belle Arti di Firenze, 
dove ricevette una formazione classica. Animato da profondo patriottismo e da ideali 
repubblicani, si arruolò come volontario e combatté per l’Indipendenza d’Italia.  

A Firenze conobbe i Macchiaioli e si unì al loro gruppo, trasferendo successivamente 
il suo studio a Piacentina, sui colli intorno alla città, dove questi giovani pittori ritraevano la 
natura dal vero.  

La sua pittura è particolarmente lineare e luminosa, tanto da ricordare la scuola 
toscana del 1400. Le sue opere oggi sono considerate di grandissimo valore, ma egli concluse 
la sua vita a Firenze, nel 1895, in modestissime condizioni economiche, sostenuto ed ospitato 
da amici fedeli. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    411                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

The education at work 

(1863) 

L’educazione al lavoro 

(1863) 
 

 
The picture depicts a simple and harsh domestic life scene, 
on the background of the Tuscany countryside which is in 

sight by the window. The two feminine figures, a  young girl 
and Virginia Battelli (the woman  the painter deeply loved) 
are dedicated to a typical feminine work, very common in 
the domestic tradition the painter liked to depict, maybe 

foreseeing that very soon this kind of work would have been 
surpassed by the new paces of modern life. 

 

 

 
Questa pittura ci presenta un ambiente domestico 
semplice ed austero, sullo sfondo della campagna 

toscana dei dintorni di Firenze, che si intravede dalla 
finestra aperta. Le due figure femminili, quella della 

bambina e quella della giovane Virginia Batelli, 
profondamente amata dal Lega, sono dedite ad uno di 

quei lavori femminili cari alla tradizione domestica che il 
pittore amava e che ha voluto ritrarre, quasi presagendo 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    412                            

 

  

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

che presto sarebbero stati superati dai ritmi di vita 
imposti dall’incalzare dei tempi nuovi. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    413                            

 

  

[Index] 

Telemaco Signorini (1835 - 1901) 
 

 
 

Born in Florence in 1835, he studied painting in the Academy of Fine Arts of that 
town, according to the classical style. Later, he drifted apart and he joined the Macchiaioli 
painters who met at the Caffé Michelangiolo.  

Heated by deep patriotic feelings, he fought for the independence of Italy in the army 
of Giuseppe Garibaldi. He travelled for a long time in the major European Countries, dwelling 
in Paris, where he got in touch with Degas.  

Influenced by the Impressionism, he represented in a wonderful way nature scenes 
flooded of light but, since he was very responsive to the social problems, he also portrayed 
some sorrow backgrounds such as madhouses and prisons. He lived the last part of his life in 
Florence where he died in 1901. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Firenze nel 1835 e vi studiò pittura secondo lo stile classico all’Accademia 
delle Belle Arti. Se ne distaccò per unirsi al gruppo dei Macchiaioli che si riunivano al Caffé 
Michelangiolo.  

Animato da profondi sentimenti patriottici, combatté per l’Indipendenza d’Italia al 
seguito di Garibaldi. Viaggiò a lungo nei maggiori paesi europei, soffermandosi in particolare 
a Parigi, dove conobbe Degas. 

Influenzato dall’Impressionismo, rappresentò felicemente scene naturalistiche 
inondate di luce, ma, essendo molto sensibile alle problematiche sociali, ritrasse anche 
ambienti di dolore, come il manicomio e la prigione. Visse il suo ultimo periodo nella sua 
Firenze, dove morì nel 1901. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    414                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

She couldn’t wait 

(1867) 

Non potendo aspettare 

(1867) 
 

The picture portrays the painter’s atelier in which a young 
and elegant woman is depicted while writing a short and 
impatient greeting. The atmosphere, sophisticated and 
cultured, is different from the rural scenes, preferred by 

most of the Macchiaioli; it rather recalls, the wide-ranging 
European Naturalism. 

 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Questo quadro raffigura l’atelier dello stesso pittore nel 
quale, una donna giovane ed elegante è dipinta nell’atto 
di scrivere un breve ed impaziente saluto. L’ambiente, 

colto e mondano, si distacca dalle scene contadine 
predilette da molti dei Macchiaioli e richiama, piuttosto, il 

più ampio respiro del Naturalismo europeo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    415                            

 

  

[Index] 

Federico Zandomeneghi (1841 - 1917) 
 

 
 

Born in Venice in 1841 he began in that town the painting studies, attending the 
Academy of fine arts. He was a passionate patriot and took part to the expedition of “the 
thousand” with Giuseppe Garibaldi. Because of his participation to the liberation revolts he 
was imprisoned by the Austrians.  

However he managed to escape and he settled in Florence, where he joined the 
Macchiaioli group, becoming a close friend of Cabianca and Martelli. He adopted the social 
themes of the Verism, by portraying humble people such as beggars ans stree cleaners. 

Afterwards he settled in Paris, where he was influenced by the Impressionism and 
where he died in 1917. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

 

Nacque a Venezia nel 1841 e vi iniziò lo studio della pittura frequentando 
l’Accademia delle Arti. Fu un fervente patriota e partecipò alla spedizione dei Mille con 
Giuseppe Garibaldi. A causa della sua partecipazione ai moti liberali fu imprigionato dagli 
Austriaci. 

Riuscito ad evadere si stabilì a Firenze, dove divenne amico di Cabianca e Diego 
Martelli, unendosi al gruppo dei Macchiaioli. Aderì alle tematiche sociali del Verismo, 
ritraendo personaggi umili, come spazzini e mendicanti.  

Si stabilì a Parigi, dove fu influenzato dall’Impressionismo e dove morì nel 1917. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    416                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

The reader 

(1870) 

La lettrice 

(1870) 
 

The picture depicts one of the painter’s friend, hosted in 
Diego Martelli’s estate. The feminine figure is reading and 

her shape stands out, with her white dress and the little 
yellow umbrella, on the background of a raw wall and a blue 

sky, creating this way some strong contrasts. 
The young woman acquires a particular importance either 
for her central position in the painting or for her intellectual 

activity which distinguishes her from the peasants, often 

 
Il quadro ci presenta un’amica del pittore, ospite 
anch’ella nella tenuta di Diego Martelli. La figura 

femminile è intenta nella lettura e  si staglia, con il suo 
abito bianco ed il suo ombrellino giallo, sullo sfondo di 

un muro grezzo e di un cielo azzurro, creando forti 
contrasti cromatici. 

La giovane donna acquista una particolare importanza, 
oltre che per la posizione centrale all’interno della tela, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    417                            

 

  

painted by the Macchiaioli. 

Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

per la sua attività intellettuale, che la distingue dalle 
contadine spesso ritratte dai Macchiaioli. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    418                            

 

  

[Index] 

Antonio Canova (1757 - 1822) 
 

 
 

This great sculptor of Veneto is the most important representative of Neoclassicism 
and gave a noticeable contribution to spread this movement around the major European 
countries with the beauty of his works. He was born in Possagno in the province of Treviso in 
1757 and he grew as an artist in the Venetian environment.  

Thank to his earnings coming from his first works, which made him immediately well-
known, he moved to Roma where he could study classical art more deeply. He stayed in 
Roma for a long time as this city, which already had many ancient beautiful works of art, 
became the centre of the European neoclassical movement. He attended a nude school at the 
Accademy of France.  

As the Neoclassicism was dominated by Napoleon, Antonio Canova was elected to 
depict the Emperor and some of his relatives, such as the beautiful Paolina Borghese 
Bonaparte. However, he never had subservient manners towards powerful figures who 
commissioned works from him, still conducting a very simple and independent lifestyle. This 
moral integrity of his raised so much respect from the people of his time, that governors who 
succeeded Napoleon honoured him so much that they gave him back all his works Napoleon 
had taken away from Italy.  

His splendid smooth white marble sculptures are inspired by Winckelmann’s 
principles. This neoclassical theorist claimed the ideal of beauty characterised by ‘simple 
nobility and quiet magnitude’. The figures are the expression of eternal and ideal beauty 
through a very refined technique which gives emphasis to their perfection.  

The subjects Canova prefers to depict are characters from the myth but he also 
devoted his work to funerary monuments of a rare beauty such as the one dedicated to Maria 
Cristina from Austria. These marble compositions, which inspire such moving feelings, pre-
announce the romantic sensitivity and remind us of the fact that in those very years Foscolo 
celebrated the importance of sepulchres as a means to pass on examples of civil virtues to the 
posterity.  

A few years after his death, which happened in Venezia in 1822, his remains were 
taken to Possagno, his hometown, and were put into the temple he wanted to be built on his 
expenses as an evidence of his generosity his faith and love for arts. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists]  

 

http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immagine:Canova.jpg


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    419                            

 

  

 

Questo grande scultore veneto è il più illustre rappresentante del Neo-classicismo e 
contribuì, con la straordinaria bellezza delle sue opere, a diffondere questo movimento nei 
maggiori paesi europei. Egli nacque a Possagno, in provincia di Treviso, nel 1757 e si formò 
artisticamente in ambiente veneziano. 

Con i proventi delle sue prime opere, che lo resero presto famoso, si trasferì a Roma, 
dove gli fu possibile approfondire lo studio dell’arte classica e dove amò risiedere a lungo, 
poiché questa città, che conservava tanti tesori dell’antichità, divenne il centro artistico di 
tutto il movimento neo-classico europeo. 

Completò la sua preparazione frequentando anche la Scuola del nudo all’Accademia di 
Francia. 

Poiché il Neo-classicismo era dominato dalla figura di Napoleone, Antonio Canova fu 
scelto per raffigurare sia l’Imperatore che alcuni suoi familiari, come la bellissima Paolina 
Borghese Bonaparte, ma non assunse mai atteggiamenti servili nei confronti dei personaggi 
potenti che gli commissionarono opere d’arte, conservando sempre uno stile di vita semplice 
ed indipendente. 

Questa sua integrità morale gli procurò una stima tale da superare gli sconvolgimenti 
politici di quei tempi turbolenti ed anche i governanti che succedettero a Napoleone lo 
onorarono a tal punto da consentirgli di ottenere la restituzione di molte opere d’arte che 
l’Imperatore aveva trafugato all’Italia. 

Le sue splendide sculture, di marmo bianco e perfettamente levigato, sono ispirate ai 
canoni dell’archeologo Winckelmann, teorico del Neo-classicismo, che proponeva l’ideale di 
una bellezza caratterizzata da “ nobile semplicità e quieta grandezza”. 

Le figure si presentano come espressioni di una bellezza ideale ed eterna, ottenuta 
grazie ad una tecnica raffinata che ce le mostra in tutta la loro perfezione. 

I soggetti prediletti dal Canova sono mitologici, ma egli si è dedicato anche a 
monumenti funebri di rara bellezza e poesia, come quello dedicato a Maria Cristina d’Austria.  

Tali composizioni marmoree, che ispirano a chi le contempli una dolente 
commozione, preannunciano la sensibilità romantica e ci ricordano che, in quegli stessi anni, 
Foscolo celebrava l’importanza dei sepolcri per tramandare ai posteri esempi di virtù civili. 

Pochi anni dopo la sua morte, avvenuta a Venezia nel 1822, le sue spoglie furono 
riportate a Possagno, il suo piccolo paese natale, e deposte nel tempio che aveva fatto erigere 
a proprie spese, lasciandoci una ultima testimonianza della sua generosità, della sua fede e del 
suo amore per l’arte. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    420                            

 

  

[Index] 

 

 
 

Paolina Borghese Bonaparte 

(1804-1808) 

Paolina Borghese Bonaparte 

(1804-1808) 
 

The statue, which is kept near the Borghese Gallery in 
Rome, was commissioned to the Canova, by the Prince 

Camillo Borghese, husband of Paolina Bonaparte, sister of 
Napoleon. The sculptor exalted the beauty of the character, 
by representing her with through typical classical features. 

The Carrara marble has been handled by the artist with 
careful techniques and precious wa; this allowe him to give 

a soft brightness and a particular smoothness to a cold 
material. 

 
Comments by:  Anna Maria Rossi 

Translated by:  Norma Patelli 

 

Quest’opera, che si trova a Roma, nella Galleria 
Borghese, fu commissionata al Canova dal Principe 

romano Camillo Borghese, marito di Paolina Bonaparte, 
sorella di Napoleone. L’artista ha esaltato la bellezza del 

personaggio raffigurandola con i tratti tipici dell’antica 
classicità romana. Il marmo di Carrara della statua è 

stato trattato dallo scultore con tecniche accuratissime e 
cere pregiate, con le quali egli abitualmente conferiva 

alla superficie del marmo, di per sé fredda, una morbida 
lucentezza ed una particolare levigatezza, che lo 
rendono particolarmente gradevole allo sguardo. 

 

[Index] [Italian Artists] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    421                            

 

  

 [Index] 

Lithuanian Literature 

 

Overview 
 
1795-1918, that is all the 19th century in Lithuania is marked with the occupation of 

three opposing forces. The western part of Lithuania was under German influence and the rest 
of the country was oppressed by Polish and Russians. Consequently, Lithuanian culture was 
developing in the oppressive environment. In the 19th century modern Lithuania was being 
developed not by denationalized noblemen, its ethnical cultural heritage was established by 
peasants, farmers and intellectuals. This period provided great influence for national identity. 

 
The 19th century in Lithuanian history is a period of national resistance and armed 

battles (namely, the uprisings in 1831 and 1863) during which Lithuanians were fighting for 
their rights to statehood, language and culture as well as striving to slip the collar of the press 
suppression which evoked the appearance of book carriers illegally distributing books written 
in Lithuanian language. 

 
In 1918 Lithuania regained its independence thus for 22 years (up to 1940) bringing 

up a new generation of writers influenced by the national Lithuanian school. 
 
The year of 1940 brought soviet occupation which lasted for 50 years and made a 

great impact on Lithuanian authors holding them under the influence of communist ideology 
and restraining them with censorship. Meanwhile, the literature of emigrants was emerging in 
the form of nostalgic creation, resulting from the solitude in the multicultural world. 

 
[Index] 

 

Apžvalga 
 
Nuo 1795 metų iki 1918 metų, tai yra visą XIX amžių, lietuvių tauta buvo okupuota 

trijų priešiškų jėgų. Mažosios Lietuvos teritorijoje reikėjo atsispirti vokiečių kultūrai, o 
Didžiojoje Lietuvoje pasipriešinti lenkinimui ir rusinimui. Būtent priešindamiesi svetimųjų 
priespaudai, lietuviai sukūrė savo kultūrą. XIX a. gimė nauja, moderni jaunoji Lietuva, kurią 
sukūrė ne nutautėję bajorai, o valstiečiai, žemdirbiai ir iš jų kilę naujieji inteligentai, išsaugoję 
etninę lietuvių kultūrą. Šiuo metu subrendo lietuvių tautinė sąmonė bei savimonė. XIX a. – tai 
kultūrinio pasipriešinimo bei ginkluotų kovų laikotarpis Lietuvos istorijoje, kuomet teisė į 
savą valstybingumą, kalbą ir kultūrą buvo ginama 1831 bei 1863 metų sukilimuose, o taip pat 
keturiasdešimt metų priešinantis lietuviškos spaudos draudimui. Būtent šiuo laikotarpiu, kai 
knygos lietuviškais rašmenimis buvo uždraustos, Lietuvoje atsiranda knygnešiai, nelegaliai 
platinantys lietuvišką spaudą. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    422                            

 

  

 
1918 – 1940 m. Lietuva išgyvena Nepriklausomybės laikotarpį, kurio metu atsirado 

nauja rašytojų karta, užaugusi ir mokslus baigusi savoje, lietuviškoje mokykloje. 
 
Po 1940-tųjų metų prasideda ir penkiasdešimt metų tęsiasi sovietinė okupacija, kurios 

metu lietuvių kūrėjus įtakoja komunistinė ideologija, o kūrybos laisvę varžo valdžios cenzūra. 
Tačiau tuo metu formuojasi ir išeivijos literatūra. Žmonių, kurie dar tėvų buvo išvežti iš 
Lietuvos kūryboje atsispindi tėvynės ilgesys bei noras suprasti, ką reiškia būti lietuviu 
daugiakultūriniame, atvirame pasaulyje. 

 

[Index]  

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                    423                            

 

  

[Index]   

Lithuanian poets 
 
 
Aistis Jonas

Baltakis Algimantas

Baltrušaitis Jurgis

Baranauskas Antanas

Bložė Vytautas

Brazdžionis Bernardas

Degutytė Janina

Kirša Faustas

Kudirka Vincas

Mačernis Vytautas

Mackus Algimantas

Maironis

Marcinkevičius Justinas

Martinaitis Marcelijus

Mieželaitis Eduardas

Nėris Salomėja

Putinas (Vincas Mykolaitis-Putinas)

Radauskas Henrikas

Rastenis Kęstutis

Sruoga Balys

Širvys Paulius

Tysliava Juozas

Vaičaitis Pranas

Venclova Tomas

Vaičiūnaitė Judita

 

 

 

[Index]

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            424      

 

  

[Index] 

Aistis Jonas (1904 – 1973) 
 

 

Jonas Aistis was born in central Lithuania. He studied Lithuanian literature at the 
University of Kaunas and received a grant from the Lithuanian Ministry of Education to study 
French literature at the University of Grenoble in France from 1936 to 1940. His doctoral 
dissertation examined the linguistic structure of Gospel translations into ancient Provancal. 
From 1944 to 1946, he worked in the Nice, France, archives and in the Paris National Library. 
He came to the United States in 1946, served for a number of years as chairman of the 
Lithuanian Writers' League and worked at the Library of Congress until his death in 1973. 
Aistis published ten books of poetry. He also wrote literary criticism and edited several 
anthologies of poetry. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

Poetas ir eseistas Jonas Aistis (tikroji pavardė Aleksandravičius) gimė 1904 m. 
Kampiškėse, Kauno rajone. 1927 m. baigė Kauno „Aušros” gimnaziją. Kauno Vytauto 
Didžiojo universitete studijavo lituanistiką. Nuo 1936 m. Grenoblio universitete 
(Prancūzijoje) studijavo prancūzų kalbą ir literatūrą. 1944 – 45 m. dirbo Nicos archyve ir 
Paryžiaus nacionalinėje bibliotekoje, o 1946 m. Jonas Aistis persikėlė į JAV, kur 
Marianapolio kolegijoje dėstė lietuvių kalbą. Savo kūryboje Jonas Aistis rėmėsi romantizmo 
atgaivinta katarsio teorija: lyrika gimsta iš kančios. Lūdesys ir grožis – neatskiriamos lyrikos 
vertės sąvokos. Šis poetas parašė dešimt poezijos knygų, taip pat rašė literatūros kritiką ir 
išleido kelias poezijos antologijas. Mirė Jonas Aistis 1973 m. Vašingtone (JAV), o 2000 m. 
perlaidotas Rumšiškėse (Lietuva). 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

http://www.xxiamzius.lt/numeriai/2004/06/30/foto/3-46.jpg
http://www.xxiamzius.lt/numeriai/2004/06/30/foto/3-46.jpg


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            425      

 

  

[Index] 

ONE DROP OF BLOOD 

(1948) 

 

VIENAS KRAUJO LAŠAS BŪT TAVE 
NUPLOVĘS 

(1948) 
 

One drop of blood would have cleansed you, 
But in your misery you missed it, 

And though we drew our strength from the old times – 
Our promises remained unfulfilled... 

 
One single word would have protected you, 

But in your misery you missed it, 
And though we swore we'd die for our homeland – 

Our promises remained unfulfilled... 

Translated by: Jonas Zdanys
  

 
Vienas kraujo lašas būt tave nuplovęs, 

O varge jo vieno tu pasigedai, 
Nors stiprybę sėmėm iš didžios senovės – 

Liko netesėti mūsų pažadai... 
 

Vienų vienas žodis būt tave apgynęs, 
Bet varge jo vieno tu pasigedai, 

Nors visi žadėjom mirti už tėvynę – 
Liko netesėti mūsų pažadai... 

 

 

 
 [Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            426      

 

  

 

[Index] 

 

Baltakis Algimantas (born 1930) 
 

 
 
Born in the village of Leliunai in 1930. In 1954, he graduated from the department of 

history and philology at Vilnius University. The same year he joined the editorial staff of 
Pergalė (Victory), a cultural and literary monthly, becoming editor-in-chief in 1964. He also 
worked as Secretary of the official Lithuanian Writers' Union. His first book of verse came 
out in 1955. The poet is remarkable for his trusting frankness about the main issues of his 
generation and his ironical confessions. His poems are marked by an impulsiveness of feeling 
and melodious form close to the tradition of Salomėja Neris. Baltakis has established himself 
as a pensive poet of city life. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

Gimė poetas, kritikas ir vertėjas 1930 m. Leliūnuose, Utenos rajone. Lituanistikos 
studijas Vilniaus universitete Algimantas Baltakis baigė 1954 m. Šis poetas priklauso 
vadinamajai „trisdešimtųjų metų gimimo kartai”, kuri atgaivino pokario metais nuskurdintą 
lietuvių poeziją. Vieni geriausių poeto eilėraščių yra romansiniai meilės eilėraščiai. Vėliau 
kultivuotas buitinis eilėraščių tipas. Poeto kūryboje dominuoja atviras, logizuotas kalbėjimas, 
o taip pat dažnos šnekamosios kalbos orientacijos. 
 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/images/gallery/small/algimantas_baltakis.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/index.php/fuseaction,writers.view%3Bid,251&h=70&w=50&sz=3&hl=lt&start=7&tbnid=yXDpUsDfpbVGSM:&tbnh=68&tbnw=49&p


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            427      

 

  

[Index] 

 

HOW  MUCH A MAN NEEDS 

(1966) 

AR DAUG ŽMOGUI REIKIA 

(1966) 

I cannot complain of my life. It is true. 
I know folk who love me, and I love them too. 

 
There’s many a hand I can heartily press. 

There’s someone who gives me a gentle caress. 
 

How much does man need? Just some bread, white or 
brown, 

A drink of pure water, a home of his own. 
 

A job to be busy with day after day. 
Some warmth just to while a cold winter away. 

 
How much does man need? Just some grass where to lie. 

One sky little star in the star-studded sky. 
 

Of all seas and oceans which roll without rest 
One frolicsome wave splashing over your breast. 

 
How much does man needs? Just a blue peaceful sky 

For twittering birds but not bombers to fly. 
 

Of all the world’s roads that may lie before you 
One doesn’t need many, one only will do. 

 
In order to love both the heaven and earth 

One needs a true friend when in need ant in mirth. 
 

How much does man need? I’m still racking my brain… 
So much and so little… It’s hard to explain… 

 
Translated by: Lionginas Pažūsis 

  

Gyvenimu skųstis tikrai negaliu. 
Mane daug kas myli, aš daug ką myliu. 

 
Turiu aš kam ranką širdingai paspaust. 
Turiu prie ko galvą nuvargęs priglaust. 

 
Ar daug žmogui reikia? Tik duonos riekės, 

Tik vandenio tyro, tik savo kertės. 
 

Tik darbo, kurs mielas. Šiek tiek šilumos. 
Ir tai – tik todėl, kad nebotum žiemos. 

 
Ar daug žmogui reikia? Žolės po medžiu. 

Žvaigždelės vienos tarp daugybės žvaigždžių. 
 

Beribėje jūroje reikia bangos, 
Užtyškančios tau ant krūtinės nuogos. 

 
Ar daug žmogui reikia? Padangės taikios, 
Kurioj ne bombonešiai – paukščiai lekios. 

 
Tarp daugelio žemės vingiuotų kelių – 

Vienintelio kelio. Nereikia kelių… 
 

Kad žemę mylėtum, nekeiktum dangaus, 
Dar reikia – nors vieno – bičiulio brangaus. 

 
Ar daug žmogui reikia? Aš galvą suku… 

Ir maža, ir daug…Atsakyti sunku… 
 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            428      

 

  

 

[Index] 

Baltrušaitis Jurgis (1873 – 1944) 
 

 

Born into a peasant family in the village of Paantvardžiai, Jurgis Baltrušaitis went to 
secondary school in Kaunas and from 1893 to 1899 studied mathematics and history at 
Moscow University. Together with S. Polyakov he founded the Scorpion publishing house in 
1899. From 1920 to 1939 Baltrušaitis was the ambassador of Lithuania to the USSR. In 1939 
he was transferred to a diplomatic post in France and was in Paris when World War II began. 
His first poems written in Russian were published in 1899. Baltrušaitis published two books 
of verse in Russian, continuing the philosophical tradition of Russian Symbolist lyrics. His 
first poem in Lithuanian was published in 1927. It was especially notable for its concentrated 
thought, restrained lyricism and combination of Symbolist poetics with old Lithuanian rural 
vocabulary. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

Poetas Jurgis Baltrušaitis gimė 1873 m. Pasandravyje, Jurbarko rajone. Mokėsi Kauno 
gimnazijoje, studijavo Maskvos universitete, gamtos mokslų fakultete. Gyvendamas 
Maskvoje Jurgis Baltrušaitis įsijungė į rusų simbolistų judėjimą, o kartu su rašytoju S. 
Poliakovu 1900 m. įkūrė leidyklą „Skorpion”.  

1920 m. Jurgis Baltrušaitis paskirtas Lietuvos Respublikos atstovu Maskvoje. Rašyti 
poetas pradėjo rusiškai, pirmieji jo eilėraščiai paskelbti 1899 m. Lietuviški eilėraščiai 
pasirodė gyvenimo pabaigoje. Lietuviškoje kūryboje poetas filosofiškai apsvarsto žmogaus 
būtį, jo vietą visatos sąrangoje. Palyginus su rusiškąją, lietuviškoji poetinė kalba yra 
konkretesnė, nors nevengiama ir abstrakčių sąvokų. Lietuviško simbolizmo fone Jurgio 
Baltrušaičio poezija originali dėl to, kad orientuojama į senąją lietuvių literatūrą. 
 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 

http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://poezija.sdf-eu.org/baltrus.jpg&imgrefurl=http://poezija.sdf-eu.org/baltrus.html&h=213&w=146&sz=13&hl=lt&start=12&tbnid=H3QHc_hfRDinQM:&tbnh=101&tbnw=69&prev=/images%3Fq%3DJurgis%2BBaltru%25C5%25A1aitis%26svnum%3D10%26hl%3Dlt%26lr%3Dlang_lt%26sa%3DN
http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://poezija.sdf-eu.org/baltrus.jpg&imgrefurl=http://poezija.sdf-eu.org/baltrus.html&h=213&w=146&sz=13&hl=lt&start=12&tbnid=H3QHc_hfRDinQM:&tbnh=101&tbnw=69&prev=/images%3Fq%3DJurgis%2BBaltru%25C5%25A1ait


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            429      

 

  

[Index] 

 

TO THE CRUCIFIED HOMELAND 

 

NUKRYŽIUOTAI TĖVYNEI 

 

(1918) (1918) 
 

An orphan's fate, t ay and stumble 

Y

Hail beats the crop, st k lightnings cleave it, 

M . 

You labor pain lly and slowly 
Throu leet, 

And though the pai seem daily greater 

 
Translated by: Ants Oras 

 

  

Dalia tavoji – našlaitystė, 
U . 

Rauda, dejonė o skydas, 

T  

Nors nuo beprasm  mirksnio smūgių 

P  
K . 

Ir sielvarto,  netekimo 
K  

K  

o str
On ways of blood and fire, is thine... 
et in your wordless grief, my humble, 

Believing heart, await the Sign... 
 
ar

The ancient shields are sighs and groans, 
Yet He who built this land, believe it, 
akes wine of tears and bread of stones

 
fu

gh fruitless days of blight and s
Yet trust and deem divine the lowly, 

Mute stigmata of bleeding feet. 
 

n 
And blessing bitter from above, 
Lift up the mind to the Creator 

For the last victory of love. 

 

gnis ir kraujas – tau vadai..
Tačiau, širdie, kentėk nebyliai, 

Tikėk ir ženklo lauk tvirtai... 
 
 – tav

Kai lauką niokoja kruša, 
ik ar nevirs vynu ir duona

Šių tavo ašarų naša? 
 
ių

Labai kelionė tau įskaus, 
riimk žaizdas ant savo kojų

aip ženklą, duotą iš dangaus..
 
 ir

artėlio lauk nei dovanos
Ir eik išvien su Amžinybe, 
ol žemė Meile suliepsnos!

 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 

[Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            430      

 

  

Baranauskas Antanas (1835 – 1902) 

 
 

Baranowski was born in the village of Onikszta, to a humble peasant family of distant 
szlachta origin. Early in his youth his parents sent him to a local bi-yearly parochial school. 
After f

[Index

inishing his studies there, Baranowski initially stayed in the parochy as a helper. After 
that he was sent to a bi-yearly school for communal writers in Rumyszki. There he started 
writing his first poems in Polish language. In 1853 he finished the school and started working 
as a writer and chancellor in various communes of the area. During his work he met Karolina 
Proniewska, a locally-renown writer, with whom he shared passion for the poetry of Adam 
Mickiewicz. With time, under notable influence of other notable Polish poet of the epoch, 
Juliusz Słowacki, Baranowski's poetry improved in style. Thanks to the friendship with 
Proniewska, in 1856 her family sponsored Baranowski's entry into Catholic seminary of 
Wornie (Lithuanian Varniai). It was there where Baranowski started writing poems in 
Lithuanian language as well. One of his juvenile works he wrote during that time under 
notable influence of Mickiewicz, Anykščiu šilelis (Forest of Onikszta), is considered to be one 
of the classics of Lithuanian poetry of 19th century. 

 
] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 
 

ė Anykščiuose, valstiečių šeimoje. Po m
Baranauskas tapo pagalbininku parapijoje, vėliau jis buvo nusiųstas mokytis į Rumšiškes. 
Toliau 

[Index

A. Baranauskas gim okyklos baigimo A. 

mokėsi Varnių kunigų seminarijoje. 1862 m. baigė Peterburgo dvasinę akademiją. Iki 
1864 m. studijavo Miuncheno, Romos, Leveno universitetuose. 1866 - 1884 m. - Kauno 
kunigų seminarijos profesorius. Svarbiausius poezijos kūrinius parašė 1857 - 1863 m. 
Patriotinės poeto ir dvasininko aspiracijos, maištinga nuotaika bei emocingas protestas prieš 
imperinės Rusijos priespaudą atsispindėjo giesmėse ir poemose: „Dainų dainelę” (1857), 
„Kelionė Petaburkan” (1858-1859), „Pasikalbėjimas Giesminyko su Lietuva” (1859), „Dievo 
rykštė ir malonė” (1859), „Ko gi skaudžia man širdelę” (1863). Reikšmingiausias A. 
Baranausko kūrinys - romantinė poema „Anykščių šilelis“, kuriame apdainuojama gimtojo 
krašto gamta, idealizuojama Lietuvos senovė, kaip kontrastas jo laikotarpio realijomis 
atskleidžiamas gamtos ir žmogaus dvasinis ryšys, protestuojama prieš tautinį lietuvių tautos 
engimą. Po 1863 m. sukilimo nuslopinimo patyrusį daug netekčių poetą užgožė dvasininkas, 
abejingas lietuvybės idėjoms. 

 
] [Lithuanian Poets]

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/lt/6/6b/Antanas_Baranauskas.jpg
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Szlachta
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Szlachta
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Szlachta
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polish_language
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1853
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1853
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Karolina_Proniewska&action=edit
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Mickiewicz
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juliusz_S%C5%82owacki
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juliusz_S%C5%82owacki
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1856
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1856
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithuanian_language
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithuanian_language
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithuanian_language
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithuanian_language
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rum%C5%A1i%C5%A1k%C4%97s
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Varniai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1862
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sankt_Peterburgas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1864
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miunchenas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roma
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1866
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1884
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaunas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1857
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1863


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            431      

 

  

 

[Index] 

 

 

THE FOREST OF ANYKŠČIAI 

(1858) 

 

ANYKŠČIŲ ŠILELIS 

(1858) 
 

(excerpt) 
How fine are forest sounds, not only scents! 
The forest hums, resounds with eloquence, 
While midnight brings a silence that is so 

Profound you hear each leaf and flower grow, 
Hear tree to tree in gentle whispers call, 

Each star through heaven move, each dewdrop fall. 
The heart is hushed. Such peace reigns everywhere 

The soul soars heavenward in quiet prayer. 
But when the new day dawns with gleaming brow 
And blades of grass, dew-laden, earthward bow 

The forest wakens, night-time silence flees 
And day again resumes its melodies. 

That rustle? It's a leaf the breeze has stirred 
Or, stirring in its nest, a waking bird. 

That crackling? It's a homebound wolf who, loath 
To hunt by day, breaks through the undergrowth. 

A captured duck the fox bears to his lair, 
A badger scurries from his burrow there, 

A roe bounds past, a squirrel neatly takes 
A flying leap onto a bough that shakes, 
A stoat or marten rummages about... 

The forest creatures are all up and out. 
Who taps? A woodpecker up in a tree. 

Who splutters there? An angry snipe, you see. 
Who whispers? It's an adder you hear hiss 

Or it's the river laps her bank in bliss. 
Who's talking? By the water gabbling geese. 
A stork its long beak snapping without cease. 
On marshes ducks are landing one by one. 

 
(ištrauka) 

Ai siaudžia gražiai miškas, netil kvėpia gardžiai, 
Siaudžia, ūžia ir skamba linksmai, dailiai, skardžiai. 

Vidūnaktyj teip tyku, kad girdi, kaip jaunas 
Lapas arbo žiedelis ant šakelių kraunas. 

Girdi, kaip šakom šnibžda medžių kalba šventa, 
Kaip žvaigždelės plevena, gaili rasa krinta. 

Del to ir širdyj visos pajautos nutilsta, 
Ramum tykumu malda dūšia dangun kilsta. 

Ė kai jau dienai brėkštant rytai šviesa tvinksta, 
Rasos pilnos žolynų žemyn galvos linksta, 

Tada šilas nubunda, visa yra tyla, 
Prasideda pamažu šventa dienos byla. 

Kas te šlama? – Ė vėju papūstas lapelis, 
Ėgi gūžtoj nubudęs sujuda paukštelis. 

Kas te treška? – Ė vilkas: dieną mat ažuodžia, 
Iš naktinės medžioklės par pakrūmes skuodžia. 

Ėgi lapė ant olą, žasioką intskandus, 
Ėgi barsiukas bėga, išlindęs iš landos; 

Ėgi linksmutė stirna par pušyną striuoksi; 
Ėgi pušin iš pušies voverytė liuoksi; 
Ėgi mat širmuonėlis ir kiaunė juodoja, 

Ir visoki žvėreliai po mišką ūlioja. 
Kas te taukši? – Ė stuobrį kapoja genelis. 
Kas mikena? – Ėgi mat perkūno oželis. 

Kas te šnibžda? – Ė šnypščia iš kelmo piktoja, 
Ėgi srove teškena upelė Šventoja. 

Kas te kalbas? – Ė žąsys paupėj gagena; 
Ėgi mat lizde starkus pamiškėj klegena; 

Ėgi antys „pry! pry! pry!” priskrydę ant liūną; 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            432      

 

  

The whooping hoopoe asks his wife and son: 
"What-what-what-what to bring you? Speak in turn! 

What-what? A grain of wheat? A fly? A worm?" 
The cuckoo glancing round cuckoos for us 

And laughs and chuckles, weeps and makes a fuss. 
The forest rings. The oriole teases Eve: 

"Eve, Eve, believe me! You this field must leave!" 
The snipe call by the stream. Then in a throng 

Of voices birds galore burst into song. 
More calls and melodies from more throats gush: 

The chiff-chaff, tomtit, siskin and the thrush, 
The magpie, jay - each adding its own tune, 

They laugh, lament and some play the buffoon. 
The nightingale calls louder than the rest 
In song full-throated, varied, full of zest, 

Forever changing, ever reaching to 
The heart as Lithuanian folk songs do. 

Each rustling, stirring leaf too joins the surge 
Of sound in which these varied voices merge 

To sing a most melodious roundelay 
In perfect harmony, no note astray. 

The ear though not distinguishing each voice 
Delights, as in far fields our eyes rejoice 

When flowers in profusion intertwine 
To make a single carpet woven fine. 

Translated by: Peter Tempest 

  

Ėgi kukutis klausia savo pačią, sūnų: 
„Ką, ką, ką jum atneštie? Ką jūs kalbat niekus? 

Ką, ką, ką, ką? ar grūdus? ar musias? ar sliekus?“ 
Ėgi mat gegutėlė dairos ir kėtojas, 
Čia kūkuodama verkia, čia kvatojas. 

Skamba tik skamba miškas: čia volungė Ievą 
Trotina: „Ieva, Ieva, neganyk po pievą!" 
Čia paupėj „ri-u! ri-u! ri-u!” tilvikas sušuko, 
Čia vėl balsų visokių – lyg trūkte pratrūko. 

Vis kitoki balseliai, vis kitokios bylos: 
Dagiliai, pečialandos, strazdeliai, čižylos, 
Kėkštai, šarkos ir kitos vis saviškai gieda: 
Toj juokias, toj vaitoja, ė toj niekus klieda. 
Ė už visus viršesnis lakštingalės balsas: 

Pilnas, skardus, griaudingas ir, teip sakyt, skalsus: 
Skamba, ūžia par krūmus ir vis kiteip mainos, 
Ir vis dūšion intsmenga – lyg Lietuvos dainos. 

Tie visoki balseliai teip krūvon suplaukia, 
Tartum kožnas lapelis čilba, kliauga, šaukia, 

Ir sutartinę taiso, ir teip gražiai dera: 
Siaudžia tik, tartum siaudžia – rentavimo nėra. 

Anei tų balsų ausis skyrium nepažįsta, 
Lyg kad ant žalios pievos žolynai pražysta, 
Ir visokie žiedeliai teip terp savęs pinas, -  
Kad iš tolo tik regis gražus margumynas.  

 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            433      

 

  

 

 

[Index] 

Bložė Vytautas (born 1930) 

 

 
 

Vytautas Bložė, born in the town of Baisogala in central Lithuania, was the son of a 
pharmacist, who also owned land. Bložė's poetry deals honestly with issues such as partisan 
warfare, mass deportation, subjugation of the will, while at the same time remaining true to 
art. Much of his subject matter is drawn from his experiences living in hiding in war-torn 
Lithuania. He has published thirteen collections of poems, has translated Spanish, Chinese, 
Japanese, Greek, Russian and Polish poetry into Lithuanian. Among others, he has translated 
the work of Lermontov, Pushkin, Nekrasov, Schiller, Vallejo, Cavafy, and Heine. In 1991 
Bložė received the Lithuanian National Prize for his book Nocturnes. Bložė is considered to 
be one of the most important innovators in modern Lithuanian poetry, and his work has 
influenced generations of younger writers. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

Poetas ir vertėjas Vytautas Petras Bložė gimė 1930 m. Baisiogaloje, Radviliškio 
rajone. Mokėsi Kėdainių, Šeduvos gimnazijose. Studijavo Vilniaus pedagoginiame institute 
rusų filologiją. 1951 – 56 m. dirbo Grožinės literatūros leidyklos redaktoriumi. 1991 m. Bložė 
gavo Nacionalinę kultūros ir meno premiją, taip pat apdovanotas už poezijos vertimus į 
lietuvių kalbą. 

Ankstyvosios poezijos centre – tragiška pokario situacija, o vėlesniojoje kūryboje 
stiprėja epinis pradas – eilėraščio centras dažnai tampa tarsi tam tikru pasakojimų branduoliu, 
kuris suskyla į buitinius, mitinius, istorinius ar fantastinius minipasaulius. 
 Vytautas Bložė išvertė M. Lermontovo, A. Puškino, H. Heinės, R. M. Rilkės ir kt. garsių 
autorių kūrybos – eilėraščių, poemų, dramų. Yra parašęs tekstų dainoms. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            434      

 

  

 

[Index] 

 

HORSES WADE IN THE NEMUNAS 

(1964) 

 

ARKLIAI BRENDA Į NEMUNĄ 

(1964) 
 

horses wade in the Nemunas 
they drink flowing fog 
they drink the morning 

floating on the Nemunas 
 

stones from ruins 
rest on the bottom 

rolling for ages 
from the high banks 

 
fires sleep on the bottom 

old swords rust 
pressed in the shallows 

moans of the drowned are quiet 
 

horses wade in the Nemunas 
they drink flowing fog 
they drink the morning 

floating on the Nemunas 
 

Translated by: Jonas Zdanys 
  

 
arkliai brenda į Nemuną 

geria tekantį rūką 
geria ryto aušrą 

plaukiančią Nemunu 
 

dugne ilsisi 
griuvėsių akmenys 

amžių nuritinti 
nuo aukštųjų krantų 
miega dugne gaisrai 
rūdija seni kalavijai 
seklumų prislėgtos 

tyli skenduolių aimanos 
 

žirgai brenda į Nemuną 
geria tekantį rūką 
geria ryto aušrą 

plaukiančią Nemunu 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            435      

 

  

 [Index] 

Bernardas Brazdžionis (1907 – 2002) 
 

 
 

 
Born in the village of Stebeikeliai in northeastern Lithuania, Brazdzionis left Lithuania 

with his parents, living temporarily in the United States until 1914. After his return to 
Lithuania, he completed his secondary and higher education, studying Lithuanian Literature 
and Linguistics. After graduating from the Lithuanian State University in Kaunas he worked 
as an editor of a number of literary publications. Brazdzionis began publishing poetry while 
still a high school student; later, as an University student, Brazdzionis's poetry became 
increasingly popular. Brazdzionis was forced to flee Lithuania during the Second World War 
and eventually resettled in the United States in 1949, where he actively participated in 
Lithuanian émigré life publishing many volumes of poetry, as well as books for children. He 
was also an editor of the magazine Lithuanian Days in Los Angeles. Brazdzionis' poetry, 
written in exile, dealt with themes of loyalty and love for the motherland, and often was set to 
music and sung at patriotic gatherings. Bernardas Brazdžionis is considered by many to be the 
patriarch of Lithuanian émigré poetry. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

B. Brazdžionis gimė Biržų apsk. Pumpėnų vals., Stebeikėlių km. Nuo 1908 m. su 
tėvais gyveno JAV. 1914 m. grįžo į Lietuvą. 1921 - 1929 m. baigė Biržų gimnaziją. 1929 - 
1934 m. Vytauto Didžiojo universitete Humanitarinių mokslų fakultete studijavo lietuvių 
kalbą ir literatūrą.1944 m. pasitraukė į Vakarus. Ravenbsurge dalyvavo išeivijos lietuvių 
kultūriniame gyvenime. 1947 m. redagavo lietuvių rašytojų metraštį „Tremties metai“. 1949 
m. atvyko į JAV. Gyvendamas Bostone, dirbo „Lietuvių enciklopedijos“ Visuotinės 
literatūros skyriaus redaktorium, 1949 - 1950 m. redagavo vaikų laikraštį „Eglutė“.Gyveno 
Los Andželo mieste. Mirė 2002 m. liepos 11 dieną, palaidotas Petrašiūnų kapinėse. 
Pirmajame poezijos rinkinyje atsispindi esminis visos kūrybos bruožas – religinė 
problematika, katastrofiniai motyvai. Vėlesniuose rinkiniuose ryški poeto pranašo pozicija. 
Išeivijoje išleistuose rinkiniuose svarbiausia tema išlieka pavergtos tautos likimas. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bir%C5%BEai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pump%C4%97nai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1908
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/JAV
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1914
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1921
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1929
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bir%C5%BE%C5%B3_gimnazija
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1934
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/VDU
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1944
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vakarai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ravensburgas&action=edit
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1947
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1949
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bostonas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lietuvi%C5%B3_enciklopedija
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1950
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petra%C5%A1i%C5%ABn%C5%B3_kapin%C4%97s


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            436      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

JOURNEY INTO NIGHT 

(1932) 

 

KELIONĖ Į NAKTĮ 

(1932) 
 

My sister told me, "You are not my brother." 
My brother told me, "You are not my brother." 
Where can I find a sister – where, a brother, 

Who am, to sister and to brother, alien? 
 

High up the Alps, deep-chasmed in the snows, 
St.Bernard's chapel hunches, hoar with years. 

A cold and lonely toller nods beside the bell 
And, sleeping, dreams and angel, lowering, awoke him. 

 
He walks now, searching for me – downhill: through night 
And day, through wind and snowdrift, thaws and freezing. 

He seems to brush my brow – his good soft hand upon me; 
He seems to touch my face – my heart he quickens. 

 
Here below, my heart will sleep. Above, awaken. Its sun 

obscured, 
Its beating stilled, this heart had verged on death. 

Through fog – a tale: all, all is a trek through fog. And life 
itself 

Ascends through fog – a journey into night. 

 
Translated by: Demie Jonaitis

 

  

 
Sesuo man tarė: - tu ne mano brolis. 
Ir brolis tarė: - tu ne mano brolis - - - 

O kur aš mielą seserį, o kur aš mielą brolį 
rasiu ir seseriai ir broliui tolimas? 

 
Yra ten Alpėse giliai po sniegu 

sena ir užpustyta san-bernardinų koplytėlė, 
pas varpą vienišas ir šaltas varpininkas miega, 

miega sapnuodamas, kad angelas atėjo ir pakėlė... 
 

Ir eina jis manęs ieškodamas pakalnėn 
per naktį ir perdien, per vėją, per pusnis, per atlydžius ir 

šaltį, - 
rodos, jau kaktą palietė, uždėjo ranką gerą, švelnią, 
rodos, jau veidą palietė, rodos, jau širdį palietė ... 

 
Čia ji užmigs. Ten ji nubus, čia širdžiai saulės trūko, 

o taip, o taip - širdis pradėjo nebeplakti... 
Per rūką pasaka, viskas, viskas per rūką, 

per rūką ir gyvenimas - kelionė į naktį. 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            437      

 

  

[Index] 

Degutytė Janina (1928 - 1990) 
 

 
 

Born in Kaunas, she graduated from the department of history and philology at Vilnius 
University in 1955. From 1958 to 1961 she worked as an editor for the Vaga Publishers in 
Vilnius. Her books of verse are marked by a romantic view of the world, improvisation in 
verse structure and emotional exclamatory phrases. She is also known as an author of several 
books of verse for children.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

Janina Degutytė - lietuvių lyrikos romantikė - Salomėjos Nėries melodingojo lyrizmo 
tradicijos tęsėja ir modifikuotoja, gamtos lyrikos, gamtinės miniatiūros kūrėja. J. Degutytė 
gimė 1928 m. Kaune. Vilniaus universitete studijavo literatūrą (baigė 1955 m.). 1958-1961 m. 
dirbo grožinės literatūros leidykloje redaktore. J. Degutytė buvo romantinio pasaulėvaizdžio ir 
romantinio stiliaus poetė. Poezijos kūrinys jai buvo monologinis kalbėjimas didžiausio 
susijaudinimo būklėje. Vėliau poezija prisipildė gamtos vaizdų ir muzikos. Gamta tapo 
pagrindiniu poetės motyvu. Poetė išleido daugybę eilėraščių rinkinių, knygų vaikams, išvertė 
A. Barto, V. Briusovo, E. Verhaereno, R. Rilkės kūrinių, parašė pjesių lėlių teatrui. Poetė 
mirė 1990 m. vasario 8 d. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://anthology.lms.lt/scan_img/57-Degutyte.jpg&imgrefurl=http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/57/autor.html&h=150&w=214&sz=8&hl=lt&start=1&tbnid=Hurn1sF_dzdMdM:&tbnh=74&tbnw=106&prev=/images%3Fq%3DJanina%2BDegut


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            438      

 

  

[Index] 
 

*** *** 
 

Bygones cannot by bygones. 
Only streets and squares 

have forgotten the smell of fire. 
Only fields 

have forgotten the taste of blood. 
Iron forsaken still bleeds with rust. 

Bygones cannot be bygones. 
Time’s not a beast, it cannot 

lick its wounds 
with a rough moistened tongue. 

We bear its wounds within. 
Hidden by commonplace words, 

a reticent pause, half-smile, half-prayer… 
Hidden in a yellowing letter 
or a visionary tombstone… 

The wounds we hide with a baby’s palm, 
with our daily, unyielding routine, 

with Chopin or Bach… 
We wish they were soothed by a kiss… 

They don’t heal, though. They bleed 
at the touch of a thoughtless hand… 

And in peace now and then 
they bloom out into glimmering roses 

or poems… 

Translated by: Lionginas Pažūsis 
  

 
Niekas nepraeina. 

Tai tik gatvės ir aikštės 
pamiršo gaisro kvapą. 

Tai tik laukai 
pamiršo kraujo skonį. 

Pamesta geležis kraujuoja rūdim. 
Niekas nepraeina. 

Laikas - ne žvėris , kuris 
drėgnu šiurkščiu liežuviu 

užlaižo savo žaizdas. 
Mes jo žaizdas nešame savyje. 

Paslėptas po kasdieniniais žodžiais, 
tylėjimu, pusiau šypsniu, pusiau malda... 

Paslėptas senam pageltusiam laiške, 
įsivaizduojamo (nerasto) kapo akmeny... 
Mes pridengiam jas vaikiškais delnukais, 

griežtu pareigų tvarkaraščiu, 
Šopenu ar Bachu... 

Norėtume, kad jas nuimtų pabučiavimu... 
Bet jos gyvos – neatsargiai 
palietus, vėl plūsta krauju... 

O paskui  - ramybėj – 
iš jų išsiskleidžia degančios rožės 

ar poemos... 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            439      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Kirša Faustas (1891 – 1964) 
 

 
 
Faustas Kirsa was born in 1891 in the village called Senadvaris (Zarasai district), 

where he finished his secondary education. By 1918, the year Lithuania proclaimed itself an 
independent republic, he had published his first book of poems. After a second book of poems 
and some spirited contributions as writer and organizer to revive the theatre and art scenes, he 
received a grant to resume formal studies at the University of Berlin. At the close of World 
War II, he was obliged to move into Germany and spent the first postwar years in a refugee 
camp at Lübeck, where he was active in revitalizing émigré cultural life, work he managed to 
continue after relocating to the United States. He died in Boston. Kirša started with the first 
and still ranks among the best of the post-Symbolists who came into their own in that sweet 
but unsettling twenty-year interim of newfound independence. His poetry was sporadically 
arrived at, or so he claimed, yet it was vigorous and expert beyond the range of his intensely 
unique lyric meditations also to include didactic and satiric verse of verve and polish. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 
 
Faustas Kirša gimė 1891 metais Senadvaryje (Zarasų rajone). Poetas mokėsi Kauno ir 

Maskvos gimnazijose, Vilniuje baigė pedagoginius kursus, o vėliau klausė paskaitų Berlyno 
universitete. Bendradarbiavo įsteigiant satyrinį teatrą, kūrė tekstus jo spektakliams. 1944 m. 
pasitraukė į Vokietiją, gyveno Liubeko mieste ir aktyviai dalyvavo emigrantų kultūriniame 
gyvenime. 1949 m. poetas Faustas Kirša emigravo į JAV, Bostono miete ir mirė. Pirmąjį savo 
kūrybos rinkinį poetas išleido 1918 m. Šiame rinkinyje išryškėjo svarbiausi Kiršos poezijos 
bruožai – abstraktumas ir neapibrėžtumas. Poezija kūrėjui yra tarsi galimybė kalbėti apie 
amžinąsias tiesas; eilėraštis dažnai tampa tiesiog idėjos deklaracija. Vėlesniuose rinkiniuose 
eilėraštis labiau meditacinis ir retoriškas. Emigracijos laikotarpiu rašytuose eilėraščiuose 
pasirodo lyrinė intonacija. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            440      

 

  

[Index] 
 

SPECK OF MIST 

 

RŪKO DULKĖ 
 

Such a yearning comes at sunset, 
Earth's weight you more clearly sense: 

Like the sullen mist, you shudder, 
Bear and suffer pangs intense... 

 
There are new bright spots, new glances, 

New flames in the ashes grey... 
You too, go as humbly crawling 

As the mist, through hill and vale! 
 

If – though but a speck – you glisten, 
Singing shall your sorrows drown... 
You shall read the palm the mist is 

Lifting and its witchcraft crown! 
 

Translated by: Peter Tempest 
 

  

 
Saulei leidžiantis taip ilgu, 

Sunkią žemę taip jauti: 
Niūria ūkana suvirpi 

Ir virpėdamas kenti… 
 

Naujos dėmės, nauji žvilgsniai, 
Naujos ugnys pelenuos… 
Slink ir tu, kaip rūko dulkė, 

Menkas kloniuos ir kalnuos. 
 

Kas pajėgs ir dulke šviesti, 
Tas ilgėdamos dainuos!.. 
Ūkanų iškeltam delne 

Burtus spės ir vainikuos!.. 

 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            441      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Kudirka Vincas (1858 – 1899) 

 

 

 

 

Vincas Kudirka was a Lithuanian poet and doctor, and the author of the Lithuanian 
national anthem. He is now regarded in Lithuania as a national hero. He began by studying 
history and philosophy in Warsaw in 1881; he changed to medicine the following year. 
During his studies, he was arrested as a subversive for having a copy of Das Kapital, was 
expelled from university, and later reintegrated. He graduated in 1889, and worked later as a 
doctor. Kudirka begun writing poetry in 1888. Simultaneously he became more active in the 
Lithuanian nationalist movement. Together with other Lithuanian student at Warsaw, he 
founded the secret society Lietuva ("Lithuania"). The following year the society began 
publishing the clandestine newspaper Varpas ("Bell"), which Kudirka directed and wrote in 
for the next 10 years. Kudirka gave a great impulse to Lithuanian culture, and published a 
collection of Lithuanian popular songs. He was also a famous satirical writer. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

V. Kudirka gimė Vilkaviškio apskrityje, Paežerių kaime, pasiturinčio ūkininko 
šeimoje. 1871 m. baigęs pradžios mokyklą, įstojo į Marijampolės gimnaziją. Tėvo verčiamas 
V. Kudirka įstojo į Seinų kunigų seminariją. Čia jis mokėsi du metus ir buvo pašalintas dėl 
„pašaukimo stokos“. 1889 m baigė Varšuvos universiteto Medicinos fakultetą. 1888 m. jis 
įkūrė Varšuvos lietuvių studentų nelegalią draugiją "Lietuva". Draugija 1889 m. pradėjo leisti 
"Varpą", kurį V. Kudirka kelerius metus redagavo.1890 – 1894 m. V. Kudirka dirbo gydytoju 
Šakiuose. Tuo metu jis jau sirgo tada dar nepagydoma liga – džiova. V. Kudirka mirė 1899 m. 
lapkričio 6 d. Naumiestyje (nuo 1934 m. - Kudirkos Naumiestis), kur ir palaidotas. Kudirkos 
kova su carizmu už Lietuvą buvo optimistinė tragedija: jėgos nelygios, dirbo beveik vienas, 
bendradarbių ir skaitytojų turėjo mažai, tačiau net savo priešus privertė jį gerbti, nes kultūrą, 
laisvą mintį gynė kultūringai. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithuania
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_anthem
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warsaw
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1881
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medicine
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Das_Kapital
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University_of_Warsaw
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1889
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1888
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Varpas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1871
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marijampol%C4%97s_gimnazija
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seinai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Var%C5%A1uva
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medicina
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1888
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Varpas_%28laikra%C5%A1tis%29
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1894
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%A0akiai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C5%BEiova
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1934


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            442      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE NATIONAL SONG 

(1898) 

 

TAUTIŠKA GIESMĖ 

(1898) 
 

Lithuania, our dear homeland, 
Land of worthy heroes, 

May your sons draw strength and vigour 
From your past experience. 

 
May your children always proudly 

Choose the paths of virtue, 
May your good and gains of people 

Be the goals they work for. 
 

May the sun over this land 
Scatter all the gloom and dark, 
Truth and light, shining bright, 

Guide our steps forever. 
 

May our love for our native land 
Keep on burning in our hearts, 

For the sake of this land 
We shall stand together. 

  

 
Lietuva, Tėvyne mūsų, 

Tu didvyrių žeme, 
Iš praeities Tavo sūnūs 

Te stiprybę semia. 
 

Tegul Tavo vaikai eina 
Vien takais dorybės, 

Tegul dirba Tavo naudai 
Ir žmonių gėrybei. 

 
Tegul saulė Lietuvoj 

Tamsumas prašalina, 
Ir šviesa, ir tiesa 

Mūs žingsnius telydi. 
 

Tegul meilė Lietuvos 
Dega mūsų širdyse, 
Vardan tos Lietuvos 

Vienybė težydi! 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            443      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Mačernis Vytautas (1920 – 1944) 
 

 
 

Vytautas Mačernis was born in the village of Šarnelė near the city of Plungė in 
northwestern Lithuania. He studied philosophy and English literature at the Kaunas and 
Vilnius universities. After the close of the universities in 1943, he lived in a small town in the 
countryside until he died in 1944. Mačernis wrote several cycles of poetry, none of which was 
published during his lifetime. In his poems themes of alarm and grief, and of pining for stable 
human values, prompted by the approaching and, later, raging battles of World War II, are 
combined with a poetic view of his homeland, severity of classical form and a profound 
lyricism. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 
 

Gyvendamas gimtajame Žemaitijos kaime Vytautas Mačernis užaugo ir sukūrė 
daugumą savo eilėraščių. Mokydamasis gimnazijoje pradėjo rašyti pirmuosius eilėraščius. 
Gimnazijoje jis vis toks pats susikaupęs, į kažką įsigilinęs, minties ir proto žmogus. 1939 m. 
pradėjo studijuoti anglų kalbą (mokėjo 7 kalbas)Vytauto Didžiojo universitete. Įsijungė į 
jaunų literatų veiklą, svajojo apie savąjį žurnalą. 1940 m. persikėlė į Vilniaus universitetą, po 
dviejų semestrų pagrindine savo specialybe pasirinko filosofiją. 1943 m. dėl karo uždarius 
universitetą, V. Mačernis grįžo tėviškėn. 1944 m. spalio 7 d. atsitiktinė sviedinio skeveldra 
atėmė jauno ir talentingo poeto gyvybę. Jis palaidotas tėviškės kalnelyje, kurį buvo labai 
pamėgęs, tarp aukštų pušų, eglių ir ąžuolų. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%BDemaitija
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1939
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angl%C5%B3_kalba
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/VDU
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1940
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vilniaus_universitetas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filosofija
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1943
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1944
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spalio_7


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            444      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

VISIONS 

INTRODUCTION 

(1939) 

 

VIZIJOS 

ĮŽANGA 

(1939) 
 

An angry evening has come to the earth, 
So very alien and restless. 

Only the wanderer wind tosses about outside the window 
And like a traveler knocks at the door. 

 
But I shall never let him in – 

I will shut the door even more securely, 
I, full of unrest, longing for something, 

Drowned in the gravity of the evening, think: 
 

Of this earth and plowed-up hills, 
Those cabins built of thick timbers, 

And men, passing from generation into generation, 
Those men, young and full of promise. 

 
I see the golden harvest of their summers, 

The ripe nights of the month of May, 
The fields after harvest, the seed, free-falling, 

And the agony of creative men. 
 

It is they who flutter in the shadows of this evening, 
Becoming clear through gestures and power, 

And slowly they are born again, 
Born again through me. 

 

Translated by: Leta Januševičiūtė-Kelertienė 

  

 
Į žemę piktas vakaras atėjo, 

Toks baisiai svetimas ir neramus, 
O ten už lango blaškosi klajoklis vėjas 

Ir lyg keleivis beldžias į duris. 
 

Bet aš vidun jo niekad neįleisiu, 
Duris užversiu dar tampriau – 

Aš pilnas nerimo, kažko pasiilgęs baisiai, 
Paskendęs vakaro rimty, mąstau 

 
Apie šią žemę ir kalvas suartas, 

Ir iš storų sienojų pastatytus šiuos namus, 
Ir žmones einant iš kartos į kartą – 
Tuos žmones jaunus, pranašius. 

 
Menu jų vasaros auksinį derlių, 

Gegužės mėnesio naktis brandžias, 
Laukus, priėjus pjūčiai, grūdą berlų 

Ir kuriančių žmonių kančias. 
 

Tai plazda jie šio vakaro šešėliuos, 
Ryškėja mostai ir galia 

Ir pamažu atgimsta vėlei, 
Atgimsta vėlei per mane... 

 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            445      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Mackus Algimantas (1932 – 1964) 
 

 
 

Algimantas Mackus was born in Pagėgiai in western Lithuania, and was forced to flee 
Lithuania along with his parents during the Soviet occupation of Lithuania. Mackus had 
worked as a journalists for the émigré community's radio and edited a magazine associated 
with this program. Mackus had published three collections of poetry; a fourth was published 
post-humously. His poetry has been characterized by Lithuanian émigré critics as being 
complex and at the same time easily accessible, yet however one might try to describe 
Mackus' work, it was clear that he had been able to break with traditional Lithuanian literary 
bonds and create a new style that combined elements of the past with ideas absorbed while 
living abroad. However, it is the tragic nature of Mackus' life – exiled at an early age, forced 
to live abroad in countries where he found no place for himself, while at the same time being 
too young to clearly remember the homeland, and an early tragic death – which has turned 
him into a symbol of a lost generation for many Lithuanians at home and abroad. Mackus 
died tragically at the age of 32 in a car accident in Chicago.  

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

Poetas Algimantas Mackus gimė Pagėgiuose, Vakarų Lietuvoje. Prasidėjus Sovietiniai 
okupacijai poetas su tėvais pasitraukė į Vakarų Europą, nuo 1949 m. gyveno JAV. Studijavo 
Ruzvelto universitete. Dirbo Mackus lietuviškoje radijo stotyje „Margutis“ ir buvo to paties 
pavadinimo laikraščio redaktorius. Žuvo poetas autokatastrofoje, būdamas 32 metų amžiaus. A. 
Mackus buvo ryškiausias bežemių kartos atstovas. Pirmąjame tradicinės lyrikos kupiname rinkinyje 
išsakomi tėvynės ilgesio, tremties ir skausmo motyvai. Antrajame rinkinyje tremtis traktuojama kaip 
iššūkis Dievo ir tiesos supratimui. Poetas tiesogiai neišsižada Dievo, tačiau kalba apie nesusitikimą su 
juo, apie situaciją, kai Dievas nebedalyvauja žmogaus gyvenime. Tokiu požiūriu poetas išreiškia 
negalėjimą pateisinti beprasmės žmogaus mirties. Mackui būdinga neornamentuotos kalbos stilistika 
padarė stiprią įtaką Lietuvos poezijai.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://anthology.lms.lt/scan_img/54-Mackus.jpg&imgrefurl=http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/54/autor.html&h=234&w=150&sz=7&hl=lt&start=1&tbnid=7LDtfRMCdxVm2M:&tbnh=109&tbnw=70&prev=/images%3Fq%3DAlgimantas%2Bmac


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            446      

 

  

[Index] 
IN TRIUMPH 

 

TRIUMFALIŠKOJI 

 
 

And death won't be won over. 
Dead men don't turn back 

once their elbows prop rubble, 
with the north moon's north eye 
to shine on the body that was. 

Bones may be gathered, but not put together 
like a word, letter by letter. 

The soul left behind, but no soul left. 
And death won't be won over. 

 
And death won't be won over. 

Women cry out for sex as for rain, 
in earth turned arid and flat. 

Bones glaring white dry out, down 
to the size of scant summer dust. 

Dust may be gathered, not enough to cover 
the waist of a body crushed. 

The body left over, and none of it left. 
And death won't be won over. 

 
And death won't be won over. 

Nor are the men ever to come home. 
Though clocks keep the beat of a pulse 

beyond time, there shall be beds 
set up for the night in empty rooms. 
With none to return, and all gone, 

the doors shut blind. 
Time left behind, and no time left. 

And death won't be won over. 

 
Translated by: Vyt Bakaitis 
 

  

 
Ir mirtis nebus nugalėta, 
Vyrai numirę neatsigrįš, 

alkūnėm graiučius parėmę. 
Šiaurės mėnulio šiaurės akis 
spindės virš buvusio kūno. 

Kaulus surinks, bet jų nesudės 
kaip žodžio – raidės prie raidės. 

 
 

Siela paliks, bet sielos neliks. 
Ir mirtis nebus nugalėta. 
Ir mirtis nebus nugalėta. 

Moterys šauks lyties kaip lietaus 
lygioj išdžiūvusioj žemėj. 

Kaulai balti sausroj sutrupės 
į smulkią vasaros dulkę. 

Dulkes surinks, bet jos neuždengs 
sutraiškyto kūno liemens. 

Kūnas paliks, bet kūno neliks. 
Ir mirtis nebus nugalėta. 

 
Ir mirtis nebus nugalėta. 

Vyrai daugiau negrįš į namus. 
Už laiko laikrodžiam plakant 

pulso ritmu, tuščiuos kambariuos 
bus nakčiai klojamos lovos. 

Niekas negrįš, bet viska išnyks, 
Duris aklinai uždarys. 

Laikas paliks, vet laiko neliks. 
Ir mirtis nebus nugalėta.  

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            447      

 

  

[Index] 

Maironis (1862 – 1932) 
 

 
 

 
Born in a peasant family on the Pasandravis estate (his real name was Jonas Mačiulis), 

Maironis went to secondary school in Kaunas, studied literature for a time at Kiev University, 
graduated from the Kaunas Seminary in 1988 and from the St. Petersburg Catholic 
Theological Academy in 1892. He was a professor at the Academy, rector of the Kaunas 
seminary and lectured on literature at Kaunas University. His first poem was published in 
1885. Maironis' poetry set the basic standards for modern Lithuanian poetry. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]
 

 

Gimė 1862 m. lapkričio 2 d. Pasandravio dvare, Šiluvos valsčiuje, netoli nuo 
Tytuvėnų (Raseinių raj.) laisvų valstiečių šeimoje, mirė 1932 m. birželio 28 d. Kaune.1883-
1884 m. studijavo literatūrą Kijevo universiteto istorijos ir filologijos fakultete. 1892 m. baigė 
Peterburgo dvasinę akademiją. Dėstė Kauno kunigų seminarijoje, buvo jos rektorius, 
Peterburgo dvasinės akademijos profesorius; nuo 1903 m. – teologijos daktaras.Pirmuosius 
eilėraščius jaunasis poetas rašė lenkų kalba. Vėliuos šiuos savo bandymus jis sunaikino. 
Reikšmingiausia Maironio kūrybos dalis – lyrika. Nemažai eilėraščių virto liaudies dainomis, 
kurioms muziką parašė J Naujalis, Č. Sasnauskas. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1862
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lapkri%C4%8Dio_2
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pasandravys
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%A0iluva
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tytuv%C4%97nai
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raseini%C5%B3_rajonas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1932
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bir%C5%BEelio_28
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaunas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1883
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1884
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kijevas
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sankt_Peterburgas


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            448      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

TRAKAI CASTLE 

(1895) 

 

TRAKŲ PILIS 

(1895) 
 

With lichen and mould overgrown all around 
A time-honoured castle there looms! 

Its true high-born rulers now sleep below ground, 
Yet Trakai outlasted their tombs. 

While centuries run, its grim ruins grow older, 
Deserted and lonely, they gradually moulder. 

 
When over the castle the wind bursts to moan 

The lake lying round climbs its walls: 
A wave rides a wave, and a mouldering stone 

Works loose and submissively falls. 
The towers keep crumbling and day after day 
So many a heart fill with gloom and dismay. 

 
Old castle! Long centuries echoed your name! 

Great men rose to glory with you! 
You saw the Great Vytautas' power and fame, 

His regiments on a review. 
Where is now your might that was dazzling with glory? 

Where is your antiquity lauded in story? 
 

You walls, dark and ruinous, covered with grime, 
Defenceless, unpeopled and dumb! 

I tenderly fancy your most precious time 
You've had in the centuries' run! 

Invaluable time! Shall we see your revival? 
Or shall you like youth just in dreams find survival? 

 
Each time when through Trakai I happen to go 

With pain my heart bitterly cries. 
A sorrowful tear down my cheek starts to flow 

And suddenly clouds my blue eyes. 

 
Pelėsiais ir kerpe apaugus aukštai 

Trakų štai garbinga pilis! 
Jos aukštus valdovus užmigdė kapai, 

O ji tebestovi dar vis. 
Bet amžiai bėga, ir griūvančios sienos 
Kas dieną nyksta apleistos ir vienos!.. 

 
Kai vėjas pakyla ir drumzdžias vanduo, 

Ir ežeras veržias platyn, - 
Banga gena bangą, ir bokšto akmuo 

Paplautas nuvirsta žemyn. 
Taip griūva sienos, liūdnesnės kas dieną, 

Graudindamos jautrią širdį ne vieną. 
 

Pilis! Tu tiek amžių praleidai garsiai! 
Ir tiek mums davei milžinų! 

Tu Vytauto didžio galybę matei, 
Kad jojo tarp savo pulkų! 

Kur tavo galia garsi palikimais? 
Kur ta senovė, brangi atminimais? 

 
Nutilusios sienos, apleistos visų, 
Be sargo, ginklų, be žmogaus! 

Kiek primenat jūs man brangiausių laikų 
Ant vieškelių amžių plataus! 

Laikai brangiausi! Ar mums dar sugrįšte? 
Ar  vien minėsme kaip savo jaunystę? 

 
Kada tik keliu važiavau pro Trakus, 

Man verkė iš skausmo širdis; 
Gaili ašarėlė beplovė skruostus 

Ir mėlynas temdė akis! 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            449      

 

  

In vain my poor heart tries to seek consolation, 

All round I see darkness and bleak desolation. 

 
Translated by Lionginas Pažūsis

 

  

Ir veltui dvasią raminti norėjau, 
Aplinkui vien tamsią naktį regėjau. 

 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            450      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

I'LL VANISH LIKE SMOKE 

(1895) 

 

IŠNYKSIU KAIP DŪMAS 

(1895) 
 

I'll vanish like smoke drifting up in the air, 
And no one will miss me at all! 

Like thousands who lived once and sank in despair,  
Whose names now can no one recall! 

 
Like waves of the seas or a man's restless thought  

This world's deeds are changing with time! 
Where's Sardis? Or Athens? The Romans who sought  

To reach in their works the sublime? 
 

Then what is my misery or inspiration?  
Those flashes revealing my soul? 

A stir of my blood or my heart's trepidation –  
The grave soon will swallow it all! 

 
My songs soon will die! Yet a fond aspiration  

Will make other poets fly high!  
The same distant star will arouse admiration,  

They'll suffer bedazzled like I! 
 

And what is the glory in song so exalted? 
A shadow that's tuning along! 

When man is no more, all the dreams he has haunted 
Will fade soon like thick crimson dawn 

 
Translated by Lionginas Pažūsis

 

  

 
Išnyksiu kaip dūmas, neblaškomas vėjo,  

Ir niekas manęs neminės!  
Tiek tūkstančių amžiais gyveno, kentėjo,  

O kas jų bent vardą atspės? 
 

Kaip bangos ant marių, kaip mintys žmogaus,  
Taip mainos pasaulio darbai!  

Kur Sardės? Atėnai? Ar Rymo garsaus  
Kur vyrai ar jų veikalai? 

 
O kas mano kančios? Ar tas įkvėpimas?  

Tie dvasios sumirgę žaibai!..  
Tik kraujas sujudęs, širdies tik plakimas,  

Kuriems nebužilgo - kapai! 
 

Užmirš mano giesmes! Poetai kiti  
Ieškos įkvėpimo brangaus; 

Ir jiems ta žvaigždė švies iš tolo skaisti,  
Bet vėl kaip mane ji apgaus! 

 
Ir kas ta garbė, giesmėmis apdainuota?  

Šešėlis, kurs bėga greta!  
Išnyko žmogus: ir svajota-sapnuota  

Išblyško kaip ryto aušra! 
 

 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            451      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Marcinkevicius Justinas (born1930) 
 
 

 
 

Justinas Marcinkevicius is an intellectual Lithuanian poet and playwright. He was 
born into a peasant family in March 10, 1930 in Vazatkiemis, Prienai district. In 1954 he 
graduated from Vilnius University History and Philology Department with degree in 
Lithuanian language and Litarature. During the times of Soviet totalitarianism he was one of 
the authors who defended the cultural self-awareness of his nation. Justinas Marcinkevicius 
wrote and keeps writing his poems in romantic and modern style. In his poems he brought 
back humanistic ideas, also he valued the esthetic side of literature and continued on the 
romantic and lyric poetry tradition. He is also known as a poetry translator. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

Poetas, dramaturgas, prozininkas Justinas Marcinkevičius gimė 1930m. kovo 10 
dieną, Važatkiemyje, Prienų rajone. 1954 m. baigė lituanistikos studijas Vilniaus universitete. 
Pagrindinė poeto kūrybos tema - Lietuva, jos istorija ir dabartis, gamta ir kultūra, žmogus 
tėvynėje ir pasaulyje, jo egzistencinė problematika: laimė, pareiga, kančia, baimė, ištikimybė, 
dora, gerumas. Poeto kūryba du kartus apdovanota Lietuvos valstybine premija, visuomeninė 
veikla - Lietuvos Santarvės premija (1994). 
 Justino Marcinkevičiaus kūryba atskiromis knygomis išleista vokiečių, rusų, anglų, 
bulgarų, vengrų, norvegų, estų, rumunų, serbų, latvių, slovakų, armėnų, čekų, uzbekų, 
gruzinų, moldavų, kirgizų, ukrainiečių ir kitomis kalbomis. Eilėraščių ciklai skelbti italų, 
prancūzų, ispanų, suomių ir kitomis kalbomis įvairiuose almanachuose, žurnaluose. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://media.search.lt/GetFile.php%3FOID%3D118062%26FID%3D344157&imgrefurl=http://www.baltrusaitis.lt/Default.aspx%3FElement%3DI_Manager2%26TopicID%3D26%26IMAction%3DViewArticles&h=125&w=150&sz=6&hl=lt&star


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            452      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

LOVE IS LIKE THIS 

(1975) 

 

TOKIA YRA MEILĖ 

(1975) 
 

In the bright glow of evening skies 
How divine is your aspect, my homeland! 

 
So come kneel and be silent awhile – 

let this space now fill up with your presence, 
because love is like this. Through the heart 

your own blood rushes calling: 
------------my homeland, 

our cradle of fortunes, your aim 
I’ve been seeking in vain 
for a lark’s nest you are 

in the boundless expanse of the fields! 
My heart melts when I look 

at the blossoming apple-tree 
a child fast asleep 

and your eyes often gleaming in mist. 
Yet I’m seeking a flower 

to remind me of you, 
bearing scents of my childhood 

and that balmy evening – 
so drowsy and warm. 

 
What a treasure it is to have you 
ever bending your gaze over me. 
I have faith, hence my words – 

oh, my words! – they are bandages 
Always stuck fast to your wounds. 

 
Translated by: Lionginas Pažūsis 

 

 
Vakarinio dangaus šviesoje 

koks gražus tavo veidas, gimtine! 
 

Atsiklaupk ir tylėk – tegul 
ši erdvė prisipildo tavęs, 

nes tokia yra meilė. Per širdį 
eina šaukdamas kraujas: 

- - - - -  gimtine, 
likimų lopšy, tavo tikslo 
ieškojau nerasdamas – 

vieversio lizdas – 
arimų platybėse – tu! 

Taip gera žiūrėti 
į žydinčią obelį, 
miegantį vaiką 

ir į tavo akis ūkanotas. 
Bet ieškau gėlės, 
kuri primintų tave, 

kurioje visą laiką kvepėtų 
vaikystė ir vakaras – 

šiltas, mieguistas. 
 

Štai: laimė turėti tave, 
visados virš manęs pasilenkusią. 

Iš čia mano žodžiai – 
o, mano žodžiai! Kaip tvarsčiai, 

prilipę prie tavo žaizdų. 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            453      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Martinaitis Marcelijus (born 1936) 
 

 
Born in the village of Paserbentis near the city of Raseiniai, Marcelijus Martinaitis 

studied at the Kaunas Polytechnic Institute. Also he studied history and philology at the 
University of Vilnius. During the period of national rebirth in Lithuania he was an important 
member of "Sajudis", political organization. Martinaitis has published ten collections of 
poetry and two collections of essays. A modern outlook on folklore, paradox and the 
grotesque is typical of Martinaitis's poetry. In his poetry Martinaitis draws extensively on the 
ethnographic wealth of the spiritual experience of the country folk. His most popular 
collection The Ballads of Kukutisis a black comedy that attempts to describe the internal and 
external conflict between the mindset and outward reactions of an ancient pagan farmer 
suddenly having found himself within the de-humanizing bureaucratic structures of post-war 
Soviet occupation.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

M. Martinaitis, poetas, eseistas, vertėjas gimė 1936 m. Paserbentyje (Raseinių r.). 
1964 baigė Vilniaus universitetą, dirbo laikraščių ir žurnalų redakcijose, nuo 1980 dėsto 
Vilniaus Universitete. Buvo Sąjūdžio narys. Nacionalinės premijos laureatas (1998). Poetas 
save suvokia kaip agrarinės kultūros atstovą, išgyvenusį tos kultūros žlugimą. M. Martinaitis 
savo kūryboje, pasiremdamas archetipiniu mąstymu, iš buities detalių bando rekonstruoti 
senąją baltų pasaulėjautą ar žemdirbių civilizacijos kontūrus ir pagrindinius jos ženklus 
(žemė, namai, Dievas, ryšys su mirusiais), gamtos ritmu pagrįstą laiko tėkmės ir būties dėsnių 
suvokimą. Naivia sąmone prisidengus, intelektualiai apmąstoma gyvenimo vertė ir prasmė, 
kuriama savita, liaudiškąja etika pagrįsta vertybių sistema: vertę gauna naivumas, 
sugebėjimas pagailėti, ašara, skaudėjimas. Vienas garsiausių poeto kūrinių – „Kukučio 
baladės”. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            454      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

LAMENTING LADYBUG. 

A SUMMER DREAM 

 

RAUDA BORUŽEI.  

VASAROS SAPNAS 
 

In the morning, 
as the sun was rising 

Ladybug died. 
 

They carried her held up high 
in a glass drop. 

 

Along the way, reapers 
stood barefoot, hats in hand. 

They scythes flashed. 
 

In front twelve horsemen rode. 
Their horses walked with lowered heads 

as if in an etching. 
And you couldn't see where the road ended. 

 

Beside the hearse 
walked a lame girl – 

she was ladybug's sister. 
 

Twelve wailers, 
those twelve 

black veiled nights 
followed wailing: 

 

"Sun, sun, 
grow reeds 

to raise Ladybug." 
 

The sun sharpened the scythes – 
the scythes cut the reeds – 

twelve horsemen rode – 
dew fell – 

 
Translated by: Laima Sruoginis 

  

 
Rytą,  

patekant saulei,  
mirė boružė. 

Ją vežė iškeltą aukštai  
stikliniam laše. 

Pakelėj be kepurių stovėjo   
basi šienpjoviai.  
Žybčiojo dalgiai. 

Priekyje dvylika raitelių jojo.  
Kaip nupiešti jų žirgai   
ėjo nuleidę galvas.  

Ir nesimatė, kur baigiasi kelias. 
Šalia katafalko  

ėjo mergaitė raiša -   
ji buvo boružės sesuo. 

Raudotojų dvylika  
tų dvylika  

juodai gobturuotų naktų  
paskui raudodamos ėjo:  

"Saulele, saulele,  
auginki smilgelę  
boružei pakilt". 

Saulę ant dalgių galando -  
dalgiais pakirto smilgelę -   

dvylika raitelių jojo -  
krito rasa --- 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            455      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Mieželaitis Eduardas (1919 - 1997) 
 

 
 

Eduardas Miezelaitis was born into a worker’s family in 1919 in the village of 
Kareivskiai. In 1939 – 1941 he studied law at the universities of Kaunas and Vilnius. During 
the war, he served as a war correspondent. His first book of verse, called „Lyrics” appeared in 
1943. He is the one of the most prolific of Lithuanian’s modern poets. Since his first books of 
verse in which he showed himself to be an emotional lyric poet, close to the tradition of 
Salomeja Neris, he has produced more than a score of books. E. Miezelaitis died in 1997 in 
Vilnius. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 

Eduardas Mieželaitis gimė darbininkų šeimoje 1919 m. Kereiviškėse. Nuo 1939 m. iki 
1941 m. poetas studijavo teisę Kaune ir Vilniuje. Karo metu tarnavo kaip karo 
korespondentas. Pirma poezijos knygą Eduardas Mieželaitis išleido 1943 m. Jo lyriška poezija 
pasižymi jausmingumu ir yra artima Salomėjos Neries eilėms. Mirė poetas 1997 m. Vilniuje. 
 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            456      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

ASHES  

 

 

PELENAI 

 
The brown pieces of bone underfoot here lying – 
like old splinters of bullets attacked by decay – 

were once two tiny feet that went leaping and flying 
in the fields after butterflies flitting away; 

they were two little hands which were gently caressing 
their mother’s soft shoulders and velvety breast; 

they were two big strong hands which were soothingly 
blessing 

their small children to wish them a good night’s rest. 
And the colourless ashes by breezes here scattered 

were eyes that once sparkled or glared distrust, 
were lips that once smiled, craved for kisses and chattered, 

and supressed bitter sufferings too…This grey dust 
hides the hearts that were grieving, rejoicing and seething, 
and the brains that were throbbing and burning with strife, 
facing desperate plight, they were twisting and wreathing 
like the letters when children first chalk the word „life…” 

And the hair that now lies in a heap over there 
once was gracefully curled; in a leisurely hour 
it would often be fondled and plaited with care, 

maybe somebody kissed it and set there a flower… 
All the tremors of hearts, dreams of happy tomorrow, 
gloomy eyes, smiling lips, all good cheer and blame 
have been turned into ashes…These people were 

swallowed 
in the ovens of death by a merciless flame… 

 
…Look, from out of blue heaven a bird downward dashes… 

Its grey wing in the sunshine surprisingly glows 
as it swoops low above the barbed wire and the ashes 

to alight by a blood-red late-flowering rose… 
I am still overwhelmed by the pain I am feeling 

and a tear has lodged somewhere deep in my breast, 

Šitie kaulų rudi trupinėliai po kojų – 
tarsi kulkų skeveldros suėstos rūdžių, - 

buvo mažos kojytės – jos šokavo, bėgiojo 
paskui baltą drugelį laukų takučiu; 

buvo trapios rankutės – jos spurdėjo ir pynės 
apie motinos kaklą, krūtis ir pečius; 

buvo didelės rankos, kurios prie krūtinės 
prisispaudusios glaudė mažus vaikučius. 

Ir pilki pelenai, čia nešiojami vėjo, - 
buvo akys, jos žaidė ir žvelgė liūdnai; 

buvo lūpos – šypsojos, bučiavos, kalbėjo 
ir kentėjo kančias…Šie pilki pelenai – 

buvo širdys, jos džiaugės, nerimo ir kentė; 
buvo smegenys, jos, kaip raidė prie raidės 

lentoje parašytame žody „gyventi”, 
raitės, rangėsi, vijosi iki mirties… 

Ir plaukai, kurių liko čia didelis kalnas, 
kitados garbanojos; galbūt kitados 

juos šukavo ir glostė, ir pynė juos delnas, 
ir kažkas juos tikriausiai bučiavo žieduos… 

Ir širdžių virpesys, ir laimingos svajonės, 
ir akių liūdesys, lengvas lūpų šypsnys – 

pelenai…pelenai…Nes prarijo tuos žmones 
krematorijų krosnių siaubinga ugnis… 

 
Lekia paukštis pro šalį…Suspurda, suošia 

sužibėjusiu saulėje pilku sparnu 
ir užgauna pražydusią kruviną rožę 

tarp spygliuotų vielų, kruvinų pelenų… 
Ir skaudu, kaip retai man gyvenime būna… 

Ašarėlė įstrigus kažkur gomury – 
tarsi kulkos skeveldra, įsmigus į kūną, 
kurios skausmą nešioti ir jausti turi… 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            457      

 

  

like a shell splinter deep in a wound never healing 
that is fated to torture and give me no rest… 

I cannot tear my gaze from the faraway flashes 
when the cloudy horizon I anxiously scan 

and I cry, as I clutch a small handful os ashes: 
Stop now, once and for all, killing man!.. 

Translated by: Lionginas Pažūsis 
 

Negaliu savo žvilgsnio nukreipti į šalį 
nuo kažkur besiniaukiančio žydro dangaus. 

Ir sakau, pelenų šių iškėlęs žiupsnelį: 

pagaliau nežudykit žmogaus!.. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            458      

 

  

[Index] 

Nėris Salomėja (1904 – 1945) 
 

 

 
 

Salomeja Neris was born in a peasant family in the village of Kirsai. Her real surname 
was Bacinskaite – Buciene. In 1928 Neris graduated from Kaunas University, where she 
studied German and Lithuanian. For several years she work as a teacher. In the first verse 
collections, „Early in the morning” (1927) and „Prints in the sand” (1931), a romantic view of 
the world was expressed with emotional sighs and notes of lyrical tenderness. Her poetry is 
marked by the delicacy and lightness of its verbal fabric, an affinity with folk poetry in the 
impulsiveness and flexibility of its phrases, by rhythmic harmony and classic lucidity. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

Salomėja Nėris, kurios tikroji pavardė yra Bačinskaitė – Bučienė, gimė valstiečių 
šeimoje Kiršų kaime. Lietuvos universitete studijavo lietuvių literatūrą bei vokiečių kalbą ir 
literatūrą. O taip pat pedagogiką. Kelis metus dirbo mokytoja Pirmuosiuose kūrybos 
rinkiniuose „Anksti rytą” bei „Pėdos smėly” eilėraščiai yra labiausiai veikiami romanso 
poetikos, būdingi kategoriški priešybių gretinimai. S. Nėries poezijos tradicija – viena 
gyvybingiausių lietuvių poezijoje. Jos įtaka jaučiama E. Mieželaičio, P. Širvio, J, Degutytės 
kūryboje. Poezijos vertimų knygos išleistos latvių, baltarusių, ukrainiečių, turkmėnų, bulgarų, 
čekų, anglų kalbomis. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            459      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

HOMELAND 

(1941) 

 

TĖVYNĖ 

(1941) 
 

Despoiled and blood-drenched by the foe 
You rise before my eyes. 

Many a hundred miles I’ll go 
To see your stirring skies. 

 
When blossoms from your apple – tress 

Or leaves in autumn fall, 
I’ll go to you, though on my knees 

Throug rain and cold I’ll crawl. 
 

Today the heavy clouds of war 
Enshroud your lovely face… 

How are your towns I see no more? 
Grim ruins take their place. 

 
You wring your hand in grief and pain: 
Where are my sons, my loyal guards? 
In empty homesteads chill winds reign 

And moles dig up the yards. 
 

Over the Nieman night drags on 
But it shall not last long. 

I’ll come to you one day at dawn 
To soothe you with my song. 

Translated by: Lionginas Pažūsis 
 

          

 
Sukruvinta ir apiplėšta 

Ji stovi man akyse. 
Šimtus aš mylių eisiu pėsčia, 

Kol gyvą pamatysiu. 
 

Žydės ten sodai, svyros vaisiai 
Ar lapai kris pageltę, - 

Aš keliais į tave pareisiu 
Per lietų, gruodą, šaltį… 

 
Šiandieną dangsto karo dūmai 

Man tavo veidą šviesų… 
O tavo miestai, dalūs rūmai? – 

Pilki, šalti griuvėsiai. 
 

Didžiam skausme rankas užlaužus: 
O kur vaikai geriausi? 

Tuščiuos namuos jų – vėjai daužos, 
Darželiuos kurmiai rausias. 

 
Ne daugel kartų saulė leisis 

Mūs Nemunėlio juostoj, - 
Aš greit sugrįšiu, aš pareisiu… 

Dainom tave paguosiu. 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            460      

 

  

 

[Index] 

Vincas Mykolaitis-Putinas (1893 – 1967) 

 

 
 

Vincas Mykolaitis-Putinas, poet, novelist, dramatist, translator, and literary historian, 
was born in a peasant family in the village Pilotiškiai near the city of Marijampolė. He studied 
at the Seiniai seminary and was ordained a priest in 1915; twenty-one year later, in 1936, he 
was relieved of his priestly duties and excommunicated for marrying one of his students, a 
step he anticipated in his famous autobiographical novel In the Shadow of the Altars 
Mykolaitis-Putinas studied at the Catholic Theological Academy in Petrograd from 1915 to 
1917. Later he went abroad to study and continued his philosophical and literary education in 
Germany. From 1923 to 1939 he was a lecturer and professor of literature at Kaunas 
University. Later he taught modern literature at the University of Vilnius.  

His first book of poetry, Red Flowers, appeared in 1917 and bordered on Symbolism. 
Putinas introduced an element of drama into Lithuanian intellectual poetry. The themes of 
closiness to the soil and of the eternal nature of existence mark his verse collections. Lyrical 
and philosophical meditation on the essence of human existence dominates his poetry.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
Vincas Mykolaitis-Putinas gimė 1893m. sausio 6d. Pilotiškių kaime, Marijampolės 

apskrityje, ūkininkų šeimoje. Mokėsi Marijampolės gimnazijoje. Baigęs 4 klases, 1909m. 
V.Mykolaitis-Putinas įstojo į Seinų kunigų seminariją ir 1915m. įsišventino kunigu. 
Pastoracinio darbo nedirbo ir 1915-1917m. toliau mokėsi Petrapilio dvasinėje akademijoje. 
1918-1922m. Friburgo universitete studijavo filosofiją, filosofijos ir meno istoriją, literatūrą. 
1923-1929m. V.Mykolaitis-Putinas dėstė Lietuvos universitete naująją lietuvių literatūrą, 
visuotinės literatūros įvadą ir estetiką. 1935m. oficialiai atsisakė kunigystės ir šio laikotarpio 
išgyvenimus perteikė romane „Altorių šešėly”. 

Ankstyvojoje Putino lyrikoje tęsiama Maironio tradicija. Eilėraščiai kupini gyvenimo 
džiaugsmo, gamtos ir meilės nuojautų, kūryboje ryškėja simbolizmas. Vėlesniuose 
eilėraščiuose vyrauja žmogaus egzistencijos tragizmas. Visai vėlyvajai lyrikai būdingos 
monumentalios poezijos formos, eilėraščių ciklai, laisva intonacija, proziško žodžio junginys 
su pakilaus kalbėjimo tradicija. 

Mirė poetas 1967m. birželio 7d. Kačerginėje, prie Kauno, palaidotas Vilniuje. 
 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            461      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

TO THE EARTH 

 

 

ŽEMEI 

 
 

You, sinful Earth, possess such strenght and beauty! 
Your flowers rival those of Paradise. 

It's hues drawn from your depths rainbows are using, 
It's from your breast that I my life derive. 

 
Of sunset's scarf your dark brow you're divesting, 

The warm spring night's intoxicating you: 
I sense your throbbing heart, your fragrant tresses 

That turn the head as meadow flowers do. 
 

Red poppies at your feet were straightway swooning, 
The reddish clouds above thinned out like mist, 

The stars assembled and the moon stopped moving 
When on that autumn night my lips you kissed. 

 
You I embraced as no one could embrace you, 

My turbulent desires in you struck root. 
I'll rise, like a magic plant, to starry spaces, 

But it's your life shall feed the growing shoot. 
 

Translated by: Peter Tempest 

  

 
Graži ir galinga esi, nuodėmingoji žeme! 

Tu praneši dangų savųjų žiedų skaidrumu. 
Iš tavo gelmių sau vaivorykštės metmenis semia - 

Iš tavo krūtinės ir aš sau gyvybės imu. 
 

Nuo juodbruvo veido saulėleidžio skarą nutraukus, 
Tu šiltą pavasario naktį manim apsvaigai: 

Jaučiu tavo plakančią širdį ir kvepiančius plaukus, 
Kaip galvą svaigina, lyg žydinčių pievų ūkai. 

 
Raudonos aguonos nulinkę tau vyto prie kojų, 
Ant tavęs rausvi debesynai pakriko lengvai, - 

Susitelkė žvaigždės ir mėnuo padangėj sustojo, 
Kai šiltą pavasario naktį mane bučiavai. 

 
Apglėbiau tave, kaip nė vienas apglėbt negalėtų. 

Įaugau tavin chaotingų geismų šaknimis. 
Kaip pasakos augalas kilsiu lig ruimų žvaigždėtų, 

O kraunamas žiedas tavąja gyvybe išmis. 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            462      

 

  

[Index] 

Radauskas Henrikas (1910 – 1970) 
 

 
 

Henrikas Radauskas was born in 1910 in Krakow (Poland). He returned to Lithuania 
in 1921. He graduated from the Panevėžys Teachers Institute in 1929, was a schoolmaster for 
one year, and studied Lithuanian, German, and Russian languages and literatures in the 
University of Kaunas. By 1944 he had been forced to flee to Germany, where he found 
himself in Berlin's Soviet occupied zone, later he managed to escape to the English zone. 
There Radauskas continued his literary career. At that time Radauskas was influenced by 
French impressionist art, baroque and rococo music, Rilke, Verlaine, Mallarme, the Polish 
poet Tuwim, and the Russian symbolists. Later Radauskas emigrated to the United States. In 
1959 Radauskas went to work in the Congress library in Washington, where he remained 
among books, paintings, poems and friends until his death in August 1970.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

Henrikas Radauskas gimė 1910 m. Krokuvoje (Lenkija). Poetas mokėsi Panevėžio 
gimnazijoje ir mokytojų seminarijoje, Vytauto Didžiojo Universitete studijavo lituanistiką, 
germanistiką ir rusistiką. 1944 m. Radauskas pasitraukė į Vokietiją, o po penkerių metų 
persikėlė į JAV. Eilėraščius poetas pradėjo publikuoti periodikoje nuo 1929 m., o pirmąjį 
poezijos rinkinį „Fontanas“ išleido 1935 m. Šiame rinkinyje išryškėja poeto kūrybos principas 
– poleminis santykis su lyrine poezijos tradicija. Esminiai Radausko kūrybos bruožai – 
estetizmas, antilyrizmas, estetinė distancija, poetinė tikrovės transformacija. Eilėraštis 
kuriamas ne kaip jausmų ar idėjų išraiška, o kaip dinamiškas poetinis pasakojimas, kuris 
paneigia realybės dėsnius, kuriame susipina ironija ir egzistencijos tragizmas. Ypatingai šie 
poeto kūrybos bruožai sustiprėja vėlyvojoje kūryboje. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            463      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

ARROW IN THE SKY 

 

 

STRĖLĖ DANGUJE 

 
 

I am an arrow that a child shot through 
An apple tree in bloom beside the sea; 
A cloud of apple blossoms, like a swan, 

Has shimmered down and landed on a wave; 
The child is wondering, he cannot tell 

The blossoms from the foam. 
 

I am an arrow that a hunter shot 
To hit an eagle that was flying by; 

For all his strength and youth, he missed the bird, 
Wounding instead the old enormous sun 
And flooding all the twilight with its blood; 

And now the day has died. 
 

I am an arrow that was shot at night 
By a crazed soldier from a fort besieged 

To plead for help from mighty heaven, but 
Not having spotted God, the arrow still 

Wanders among the frigid constellations, 
Not daring to return. 

 
Translated by: Theodore Melnechuk 

  

 
Aš – kaip strėlė, kurią paleido vaikas 

Į baltą obelį žaliam pajūry, 
Ir debesis žiedų, tarytum gulbė, 
Mirgėdamas į bangą nusileido, 
Ir stebis vaikas ir negali putų 

Atskirti nuo žiedų. 
 

Aš – kaip strėlė, kurią stiprus ir jaunas 
Medžiotojas į praskrendantį arą 
Paleido, bet į paukštį nepataikė 
Ir sužeidė didžiulę seną saulę 
Ir visą vakarą krauju užpylė, 

Ir numirė diena. 
 

Aš – kaip strėlė, kurią, netekęs proto 
Kareivis priešo apsuptoj tvirtovėj 

Paleido naktį į galingą dangų 
Prašyt pagalbos, bet, neradus Dievo, 
Strėlė klajoja tarp šaltų žvaigždynų, 

Nedrįsdama sugįžt. 

 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            464      

 

  

[Index] 

Rastenis Kęstutis (born 1950) 
 

 
 
Kęstutis Rastenis was born in Utena, Lithuania. In 1968 he finished Tauragnai 

secondary school. In 1973 graduated from Vilnius university history department. In 1978 
completed doctorship studies in history of philosophy in Institute of Philosophy, Sociology 
and Law. He was working in Mintis publishing house as senior scientific editor.  

Rastenis is a member of Lithuanian Writers' union. He translated from English into 
Lithuanian philosophical books: “An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding” by D. 
Hume, “Leviathan” by T. Hobbes, “Nations and Nationalism” by E. Gellner, and others. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 
 

Poetas ir kritikas Kęstutis Rastenis gimė Utenoje, baigė Vilniaus universiteto istorijos 
fakultetą. Dirbo Partijos istorijos institute, Knygų rūmuose, „Minties“ leidykloje, Kūlturos ir 
meno institute. Poeto K. Rastenio poezija santūri, dažnai jai būdinga klasikinė forma, vyrauja 
egzistencinio nerimo, harmonijos ilgesio motyvai. Paskelbė poezijos knygų, spekltaklių 
recenzijų, išvertė filosofų E. Gellerio, T. Hobbeso ir kt. veikalų.   

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            465      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

ALONE IN THE NIGHT IN FINLAND 

 

 

VIENAS NAKTY SUOMIJOJ 

 
 

Let's be all things mad. 
As foolish as... 

Let's make the very abyss of your eyes itself distinct 
That black August night – 

 
Let's reveal the web of vision 

Which – once caught – shall never allow us to be free of it 
Let's open the room of your hope – 
You'll find a cup of treasures within. 

 
Let's... Let's go! Men and women, 

Wives and children... All of us, let's go, 
Let's make love in the shadow of war. 

The threat of war – it stuns us – 
 

There is no consolation. Only there 
In the outskirts of sepulchral cities suspense grows. 

The last tram near Helsinki's station runs off 
And you are left to stand alone in the night in Finland. 

Translated by: unknown 

  

 
Tebūna viskas beprotiška, 

Lygiai kaip ir kvaila - 
Tegu išryškėja tavo akių bedugnė 

Tą tamsią rugpjūčio naktį - 
Tegu atsiskleidžia vizijų tinklas, 

Kurian sugauti jau niekad nepaspruksim - 
Tegu atsiveria tavo vilties kambarys - 

Jame surasi brangenybių kraitę. 
Tegu. Tegu eina vyrai ir moterys, 

Žmonos ir vaikai. Visi jie tegu eina, 
Tegu mylisi karo šešėly - 

Karo grėsmė - ji mus pribloškia - 
Nėra jau jokios paguodos. Tik ten 

Miestų gūdžių pakrašty lūkestis auga 
Nuvažiuoja paskutinis tramvajus pro Helsinkio stotį - 

Ir lieki nakty Suomijoj vienas stovėti. 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            466      

 

  

[Index] 

Sruoga Balys (1896 – 1947) 
 

 
 

Poet Balys Sruoga was born in a peasant family. In 1915-1918 he studied at the 
universities of Petrograd and Moscow and in 1921-1924 did Slavonic studies at Munich 
University where he received the degree of Doctor of Philology. From. He was one of 47 
Lithuanian intellectuals arrested as hostages during the World War II. Sruoga was held at the 
Stutthof concentration camp from 1943 till 1945. After the war he worked as a professor at 
Vilnius University. His poems first appeared in 1911. Influenced by Russian Symbolism, he 
introduced in Lithuanian poetry Verlaine's kind of verse in which the predominant note is one 
of free play of emotions and understatement. Sruoga wrote historical plays of a lyrical nature. 
The best known book of Balys Sruoga is called “Forest of the Gods”. It’s a book of 
reminiscences of the Stutthoff concentration camp. He also published studies in the field of 
folklore, the history of the Lithuanian theatre and Russian literature. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 

 
Poetas, dramaturgas, kritikas, vertėjas ir publicistas Balys Sruoga gimė valstiečių 

šeimoje, Baibokų kaime, Biržų rajone. Studijavo literatūrą Petrogrado, Maskvos ir Miuncheno 
universitetuose. Pirmuosius eilėraščius pradėjo spausdinti 1911 m. Poetinėje Sruogos 
kūryboje ryškėjo individuali problematika, noras sukurti ką nors naujo. Sruogos eilėraščiai 
yra sugrupuoti į ciklus pagal simbolizmo tradiciją, improvizaciniai, grindžiami muzikiniu 
skambesiu, trumpalaike nuotaika, perteikia beribiškumo ir laisvė įspūdį. Vėliau poetas laikė 
save romantiku, o į jaunystės lyrikos dalį žiūrėjo skeptiškai. Meno esmė, Sruogos supratimu, 
visuotinums ir kosmiškumas, savitas sielos gyvenimas, tautos dvasia, kuri ryškiausiai 
atsisipindi liaudies dainose. Garsiausias Balio Sruogos kūrinys yra romanas “Dievų miškas” 
kuriame aprašomas gyvenimas Štutgofo koncentracijos stovykloje. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 

     



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            467      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

SONG OF MIST 

 

 

ŪKANOTOJI 

 
 

The smooth oar lifts no spray, 
The soft breeze dies away, 
There's joy in store today. 

 
The waves a silence binds, 
The rowboot softly glides, 

The road of mourners winds. 
 

If but a sigh you'd spare! 
Did you not hear, or care, 

When storms beset me there? 
 

From yearning I was lost, 
By gales my heart was tossed, 

In mist my dreams were crossed. 
 

The oar slips through the air, 
My heart weeps in despair, 

Unheeded is my prayer. 

 
Translated by: Peter Tempest 

  

 
Tylus irklo palietimas, 

Vėjo mirštančio dvelkimas, 
Kažkoks laimės nujautimas - -  

 
Tyli bangos vainikuotos, 

Tyliai slenka, tyliai luotas  -  -  
Kelias liūdinčių vingiuotas  -  -  

 
Iš tavęs nors garsą vėjo! 
Negirdėjai, neskaudėjo, 

Kaip mane audra lydėjo? 
 

Tai ilgėjimos pašėlo, 
Sieloj viesulą sukėlo, 

Su ūkais sapnus suvėlo -  -  
 

Irklas tyliai vėl iškrinta -  -  
Siela verkia, siela junta –  

Neišgirsta malda šventa -  -  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            468      

 

  

[Index] 

Širvys Paulius (1920 – 1979) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Poet Paulius Širvys was born into a peasant family in the village of Padustelis in 1920. 
He graduated from a farming school in 1940 and from the Institute of Literature in 1957. He 
fought in World War Two and twice escaped from captivity. His verse was first published in 
1947. Širvys' lyrical poems are permeated with Lithuanian folklore traditions and melodious 
poetic patterns. His books of verse, “Native Birches Rustle” (1956), “Longing Is a Song” 
(1972) and others, are marked by the lyrical quality of his wartime memories, sincerity of 
expression and the sad melodiousness of folk song. A few poems of this poet became a well 
known songs. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 

Poetas Paulius Širvys gimė 1920 m. Padustėlyje (Zarasų raj.). Baigė žemės ūkio 
mokyklą, įstojo į Vilniaus karo pėstininkų mokyklą. Dalyvavo Antrajame pasauliniame kare, 
du kartus pateko į vokiečių nelaisvę ir pabėgo. Baigė Maskvos M. Gorkio literatūros instituto 
aukštuosius literatūros kursus. 1956 m. poetas išleido eilėraščių rinkinį „Ošia gimtinės 
beržai“, o 1972 m.  – penkiolikos kūrybinių metų rinkinį „Ilgesys – ta giesmė“.  Poeto kūrybai 
būdingas melodingas, tautosakiškas eiliavimas, atspindintis prieškario neoromantikų tradiciją. 
Svarbiausios Širvio poezijos temos – karas, tėviškė ir meilė. Ne vienas poeto eilėraštis tapo 
gerai žinoma daina. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            469      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE DANCE WAS OVER 

 

 

PAMINTOS GĖLĖS 

 
 

The dance was over. 
All sank in darkness. 

In maple shadows 
Rustled the night. 

 
The rose I brought you 
Was doomed to wither. 
Love too was sharing 

The flower's plight. 
 

I saw you shunning 
My pleading glances 
But kept on gazing 

Into your eyes. 
 

And then I trembled 
In fear and frenzy 

And grew as dreary 
As autumn skies. 

 
I felt my heartstrings 

Broke with a snapping. 
We sat in silence 
Alien, withdrawn. 

 
I still remembered 

The dreams we cherished 
When cocks were crowing 

At early dawn. 
 

Where have you vanished 
Love's sighs so pleasing, 

 
Baigėsi šokis. 
Blėso žibintas. 
Klevų šešėliuos  

0šė naktis. 
 

Gėlės – nuskintos. 
Gėlės – pamintos. 
Gėlių ir meilės –  

Viena lemtis. 
 

Aš pažiūrėjau 
Į tavo veidą. 
Į tavo šaltas 
Gilias akis. 

 
Ir sudrebėjau, 

Rankas nuleidau. 
Ir apsiniaukiau 
Kaip ta naktis. 

 
Kažkas užgeso  
Manoj krūtinėj 
Sėdėjom tylūs  

Ir svetimi. 
 

O buvo dienos –  
Svajonę pynėm, 
Ir mums giedojo  
Gaidžiai pirmi. 

 
Ne to jau naktys, 
Ne tie ir žodžiai. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            470      

 

  

Deep as the rustle 
Of forest pines? 

 
There are no bridges 

Left for retreating. 
Goodbye, my lassie, 
Sweet love of mine. 

 
The one I cherished 
Tonight was buried. 
We were not able 

To get along. 
 

A white star tumbled 
Over the forest 

Suddenly ending 
My love and song. 

 
Translated by: Lionginas Pažūsis 

 

Pakirptas auksas 
Piukių kasų. 

 
Neliko nieko, 

Mergaite sodžiaus, 
Iš mūsų meilės  
Dienų šviesių. 

 
Kur tos naktelės, 

Atsidusimai –  
Gilūs kaip šilo 

Tyli daina? 
 

Neliko tiltų 
Atgal gįžimui. 

Sudie, mergaite 
Mano jauna. 

 
Kurią mylėjau –  
Šią naktį mirė 
Tu nebebūsi  

Daugiau man ta. 
 

Kažkur sudužo 
Į tamsią girią 
Daina ir meilė 
 Nesuprasta. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            471      

 

  

[Index] 

Tysliava Juozas (1902 – 1961) 
 

 
 

Juozas Tysliava was born in a peasant family in the village of Geisteriškiai. From 
1922 to 1929 he studied literature and journalism at Kaunas and Paris universities. A member 
of the “Four Winds”, a Lithuanian avant-garde group, in Paris he joined an international 
modernist group and in 1928 published a multi-language journal “Muba”. In 1932 he went to 
the United States. His work was first published in 1918. Tysliava published volumes of verse, 
“Will-o'-the-wisos” (1922), “In the Niemen's Embrace” (1924), “Into the Distance” (1926), 
combined the traditions of integral lyricism with urban themes and a dynamic expressiveness. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 
Juozas Tysliava gimė valstiečių šeimoje, Geisteriškių kaime. Tarnavo Lietuvos 

savanorių gretose, o pasitraukęs iš kariuomenės dirbo redakcinį darbą laikraščiuose. Studijavo 
Kauno ir Paryžiaus universitetuose. Paryžiuje išleido eilėraščių rinkinį prancūzų kalba. Nuo 
1932 m. poetas gyveno JAV, kur buvo aktyvus lietuvių bendruomenės veikėjas. Savo 
kūryboje Tysliava originaliai sujungė neoromantinius, modernistinius bei avangardistinius 
lietuvių poezijos ieškojimus, būdingus trečiajam dešimtmečiui. Poetas davė pradžią 
žaidybinės kilmės estetikai, kūrybos atvirumui ir dinamikai. Jis savaip tiesė naujus kelius 
radikalioms lietuvių poezijos reformoms.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 
 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            472      

 

  

[Index] 
 

DEAR LITHUANIAN 

(1925) 

 

LIETUVI 

(1925) 
 

My countryman, dear Lithuanian 
Brought up in meadows and in leafy dales, 

To lead a new life is my invitation, 
A life loud with the song of radio-nightingales. 

 
I offer you a long asphalted highway 

With streetlamps to escort you through the night. 
Forget all you have lost in forest byways! 

New forests full of trams will hum for your delight. 
 

Here every morning lorry and mill hooters 
Such entertaining concerts shall provide, 

You will no longer care who was it used to 
Instil in you love for the countryside. 

 
My countryman, dear Lithuanian! 

Don't sulk if aeroplanes you cannot hear. 
Remember how the carwheel crushed your father 

The day his shy horse bolted, struck with fear. 
 

The train will teach you that in sooty tunnels 
Steel windows must be raised without delay. 
And when you climb a tower at the top of it 
Observe well what you have to do next day. 

 
At four p.m. tomorrow cine-radio 

Intend your Heavenly Father to present. 
You'll be delighted and an Eldorado 

Without a guide you'll find within yourself. 

 
Translated by: Peter Tempest

 

 
Lietuvi, mano mylimas lietuvi, 

Užaugęs pievose ir girių duburiuos, 
Kviečiu dabar tave į naują būvį, 

Kur radijo lakštingalos tau amžių amžius suoks. 
 

Tau duosiu ilgą asfaltuotą gatvę, 
Kinematografas (dešimtoji mūza) vakarais tave čia 

palydės. 
Lietuvi, užsimiršk, ką giriose esi praradęs, -  
Tramvajų giriose tau naujos girios pražydės. 

 
Rytais mašinų, fabrikų švilpukai 

Tau šičia tokius koncertus supūs, 
Kad tu ir žinot nebežinosi, kas įbruko 
Į atmintį tau pievas, praeities kapus... 

 
Lietuvi, mano mylimas lietuvi, 

Nenusimink, jei tavo laivas anapus debesų pasibaidys. 
Atsimeni, kaip tavo tėvui buvo 

Karšta, kai pakinkytą juodbėrį išgasdino gaidys? 
 

Tave čia traukinys, įlindęs gyvate į požemį, 
Parodys, kaip gyventi tarp dienos ir nakties. 

Kai tu turėsi naujo žmogaus požymį, 
Keliai į ateitį tau patys nusities. 

 
Rytoj, tą pačią valandą, kai kino radijo 

Parodys tavo tėvą danguje, 
Tu džiaugsiesi suradęs susiradęs 

Be vado Eldorado žmoguje.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            473      

 

  

 
[Index] 

 

Vaičaitis Pranas (1876 – 1901) 
 

 
 

Pranas Vaicaitis was born into a peasant family in the village of Santakai in 1876. In 
1900 graduated in law from St. Petersburg University. He worked in the library of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences. His first verses were published in the illegal liberal journal „Varpas“ 
(Bell) in 1896. In his ballads on historical themes and poems describing social contrasts he 
used a syllabic stress to achieve emotionally-charged melodiousness. In the history of 
Lithuanian literature Vaicaitis figures as an eminent democratic poet of the late 19th century.  

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 
Pranas Vaičaitis gimė 1876 m. Santakų kaime (Šakių rajone). Mokėsi Peterburgo 

Universitete, Teisės fakultete. Gyvendamas Peterburge poetas aktyviai dalyvavo lietuvių 
draugijų veikloje, bendradarbiavo leidžiant draudžiamą lietuvių spaudą. Nuo 1897 m. 
prasidėjo poeto politinis persekiojimas. P. Vaicaitis pusantrų metų prasikankino ypatingoje 
policijos priežiūroje ir kartu su tėvu buvo nubaustas administracine tvarka. Nuo 1900 m. 
poetas dirbo Peterburgo Mokslų akademijos bibliotekoje, bet greitai susirgo džiova ir grįžo į 
Lietuvą. Sirgdamas nemažai rašė. Jo poezijoje galima išskirti kelis tematinius branduolius: 
tėviškės meilė ir ilgesys bei rūpestis gimtosios šalies padėties ir tautos likimo. Mirė poetas 
1901 m. tėviškėje. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            474      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THERE IS THE LAND WHERE RIVERS 
FLOW 

(1897) 

YRA ŠALIS, KUR UPĖS TEKA 

(1897) 

 
There is a land where rivers flow 
Through humming forests merrily 

And babble gaily as they go 
While tuneful skylarks sing in glee. 
There people shed abundant sweat 

In summer, working heavily, 
And threadbare clothing - shred on  shred - 

Covers their bodies scantily. 
And yet they treat with all their heart 

A guest with hospitality - 
With food and drink all piping hot 

Without undue formality. 
The slender lasses of that land 

Are fairer than in any song. 
That land is Lithuania, 

But I was there not very long... 
Inviting folk to sleep, the sun 

Beneath the skyline hides away; 
Poor Lithuanians then sing 
After the labours of the day, 

And pretty girls with faces bent 
Towards the rue, at evening hours 

Water it, breathing in its scent, 
And pluck the lily's fragile flowers. 

A warm, soft evening I recall 
After a torrid summer day; 

With peace and calm it fills my soul, 
While songs rise somewhere far away. 

A distant bell sends heavy chimes, 
Pure clear and loud they come to me. 

I cannot sleep, although the birds 

 
Yra šalis, kur upės teka 

Linksmai tarp girių ūžiančių 
Ir meiliai tarpu savęs šneka 
Prie giesmininkų vėversių. 

Ten prakaitas aplieja žmones 
Prie vasaros darbų sunkių 

Ir prastas aprėdas marškonis 
Apdengia sąnarius visų. 

Bent tave meiliai pavaišina, 
Kaip tik nueisi į svečius,- 
Ten tave myli, valgydina, 
Kiek paleidžia išteklius. 

Ir grakščios tos šalies merginos 
Ten žydi vis kuo nopuikiau... 

Šalis ta Lietuva vadinas – 
Bet aš neilgai ten buvau... 

Atsimenu, kada į guolį 
Saulutę prašo vakarai 

Ir gieda lietuviai varguoliai, 
Nes pabaigti dienos darbai... 

Kaip tąsyk mergos veidą skaistų 
Prie rūtų lenkia kvepiančių, 

Dainuodamos jas meiliai laisto, 
Lelijų skinas žydinčių. 

Atsimenu, kaip vakars šiltas 
Po vasaros kaitrios dienos 
Ir oras, ramumu išpiltas, 

Nenorom traukia prie dainos, 
Kaip tąsyk varpas sunkiai gaudžia 

Ir užgirdėt toli toli... 
Seniai jau paukščiai medžiuos snaudžia, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            475      

 

  

Long since sleep fast in every tree. 
Like river waters flow my thoughts, 

My spirit bathes in perfect bliss, 
And Nature seems to say to me: 

How lovely Lithuania is! 
My country! What a lovely land 

I left and lost so suddenly! 
No words are there that could express 

My anguish flowing turbidly! 
 

Translated by: Dorian Rottenberg 
 
  

Bet pats užmigti negali... 
Kaip vandens upės mislys teka, 

Idėjos reiškiasi galvoj, 
Gamta su tavim, rodos, šneka: 
„Gražu, gražu mūs Lietuvoj...“ 
O tėviške! kaip mielas kraštas, 

Kurio taip netekau ūmai, - 
To neišreikš nė vienas raštas, 

Tą pasakys vieni jausmai... 
 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            476      

 

  

[Index] 

Venclova Tomas (born 1937) 
 

 
 

 
Tomas Venclova began publishing poems while still in his teens. On graduating 

Vilnius University, he stayed on to teach there. Because of his outspoken membership in 
Lithuanian Helsinki Group, which monitored Soviet violations of human rights in Lithuania, 
Venclova was threatened with a number of sanctions, but finally was allowed to emigrate. He 
has settled in the United States and is currently teaching at Yale. Venclova's spirited re-
engagement with the modes and subjects of a cosmopolitan classical tradition has influenced 
a substantial generation of Lithuanian poets. His dry witty style is marked by a highly 
controlled irony that holds out an effective resilience against the bleak eventuality of his 
appraisals.  

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 
Poetas, vertėjas, literatūros tyrinėtojas ir publicistas Tomas Venclova gimė 

Klaipėdoje. Dar būdamas paauglys jau pradėjo spausdinti eilėraščius. Baigė Vilniaus 
universiteto lituanistikos fakultetą, dirbo istorijos institute, dėstė Vilniaus universitete. Buvo 
Lietuvos Helsinkio grupės, kovojusios už žmogaus teises, narys, emigravo į JAV, dirba 
Yale‘io universitete. Pagal paties Venclovos pateiktą poezijos tyrinėjimuose taikomą 
tipologiją, jo poezija priklauso disciplinuotos poezijos tipui. Poetas žavisi realybės formomis, 
jam poezija – pasaulio išsakymas, chaotiškiems jo pavidalams suteikiantis formą. 
Paskutiniųjų Venclovos rinkinių pagrindinė ašis – tremties motyvas ir su juo susijusi 
ištuštėjusio pasaulio tema.  

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            477      

 

  

[Index] 
 

DIALOGUE IN WINTER 

 

 

PAŠNEKESYS ŽIEMĄ 

 
 

Step into this landscape. It is still dark. 
On the far side of the dunes drones the empty road. 

The continent wars with the seas – 
It is invisible, but brimming with voices. 

A traveler or an angel left 
This light snow-dusted track, 

And the shore's reflection in the black window 
Reminds us of the sterile Antarctic. 

 

The deep sea still foams, is not yet frozen. 
The sands have blown for more than just a mile. 
Here the bridge becomes distinct, here obscure 

As the severe cavity of winter grows and spreads. 
There are no telegrams, no letters, 

Only photographs. The transistor doesn't work. 
It is as if a candle, dripping wax, 

Stamped and sealed this dangerous time. 
 

How damp the air, how steep the rock, 
How powerful the roentgen of daybreak! 

Straining your eyes you can see how the walls clear, 
The church tower, and the figure of a man. 
Only the foggy contours of trees stand out 

Against the white background. Through the bark, 
Even shut-eyed, you can almost see 

The last, narrow resistant ring. 
 

"That habit tires the eyes, 
After an hour, it's not hard to get lost." 

"Prophecy does not waste its whispers on us." 
The hoarfrost-covered axis tilts, 

And it seems that at the edge of the horizon, 
Where ships blacken and sound stiffens, 

In the sluggish ocean sky 

 
Įženk į šį peizažą. Dar tamsu. 

Anapus kopų gaudžia tuščias plentas. 
Su jūromis kariauja kontinentas –  
Nematomas, bet sklidinas balsų. 

Praeivis arba angelas  sniege 
Paliko lengvą užpustytą brydę, 

Ir kranto atspindys juosvam lange 
Mums primena bevaisę Antarktidę. 

 

Putoja neužšalus pragarmė. 
Jau nebe pirmą mylią rieda smiltys. 
Čia paryškėja, čia išnyksta tiltas, 
Ir plinta atšiauri žiemos ertmė. 
Nėra nei telegramų, nei laiškų, 

Tik nuotarukos. Tranzistorius neveikia. 
Sakytum, žvakė, lašanti vašku, 
Užantspaudavo pavojingą laiką. 

 

Koks drėgnas oras, koks skardus akmuo, 
Koks visagalis paryčio rentgenas! 

Įtempus žvilgsnį, praskaidrėja sienos, 
Bažnyčios bokštas ir žmogaus liemuo. 

Baltam fone išsiskiria tiktai 
Migloti medžių kontūrai. Pro žievę, 

Net užsimerkęs tu beveik matai, 
Atsparią, siaurą paskutinę rievę. 

 

„Tas įprotis išvargina akis, 
Po valandėlės nesunku suklysti“. 
„Ne apie mus byloja pranašystė“. 

Pakrypsta apšarmojusi ašis 
Ir, rodos, horizonto riboje, 

Kur juoduoja laivai ir stingsta garsas, 
Nejudriame pajūrio danguje 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            478      

 

  

Flare the planets Jupiter and Mars. 
 

The emptiness spreads to the Atlantic. 
The fields are bare – like unlocked halls. 
February hides beneath January's layers, 

The plains cower from the wet wind. 
Beyond the seas, mountains bare themselves, 

In the depths the dissolving snowdrift 
Dwindles and blackens. "And what is that?" 
"Again, river mouths, bays, and harbors." 

 

Beneath the heavy net of clouds 
Cramped clearings glitter like fish. 

"Do you remember what the stars said?" 
"This century rolls into being without signs, 

That's the fact." "Death's attraction 
Fetters man, plant, and thing, 

That's why grains sprout and offerings burn, 
And that's why I think not everything is finished." 

 

"Where is the witness? I don't understand, 
Who divides the truth from the lies: 

Perhaps the two of us are alone in the world." 
"And it seems to me you are the only one " 

"And the third speaker? You say 
No one hears this discussion?" 

"There is heaven and the snow-covered fields, 
And sometimes the voice outlives the heart." 

 

Midday darkens the trees. 
In broad daylight, you are conscious only 

Of small things, scratched from nothing an hour ago, 
Which stand in place of the words: 

A broken chip of an ice chunk, 
A skeleton of branches, a crumbled brickhouse 

Near the bend in the road... Later – stillness 
On this side of the sea, and on the other side of the sea. 

Translated by: Jonas Zdanys
  

Įsidega Jupiteris ir Marsas. 
 

Ligi Atlanto plyti tuštuma. 
Dyki laukai – lyg atrakintos salės. 

Po sausio sluoksniu slepiasi vasaris, 
Nuo šlapio vėjo gūžias lyguma. 
Už marių apsinuogina kalnai, 

Duburyje suslūgsta ir pajuosta 
Aptirpusi pusnis. „O kas tenai?“ 

„Vėl upių žiotys, įlankos ir uostai“. 
 

Po sunkiasvorio debesio tinklu 
Tarytum žuvys blizga ankštos aikštės. 
„Ar tu atsimeni, ką sakė žvaigždės?“ 

„Šis amžius išsiverčia be ženklų,“ 
Tėra statistika“. „Mirties trauka 

Sukausto žmogų, augalą ir daiktą, 
Tačiau sudygsta grūdas ir auka, 

Ir štai tada, manau, ne viskas baigta“. 
 

„Kur liudininkas? Aš nesuprantu, 
Kas perskiria tikrovę ir apgaulę: 
Gal mudu esame vieni pasauly“. 
„O man atrodo, kad esi tik tu“. 

„O trečias pašnekovas? Tu sakai, 
Kad niekas šito pokalbio negirdi?“ 

„Yra dangus ir apsnigti laukai, 
O balsas kartais pergyvena širdį“. 

 

Vidurdienis patamsina medžius. 
Visai prašvitus, sąmonėje lieka 
Prieš valandėlę sutverti iš nieko 

Lengvi daiktai, atstojantys žodžius: 
Sudužusi ledokšnio atskala, 

Šakų skeletas, ištrupėjęs mūras 
Ties gatvės posūkiu...Paskui – tyla 

Ir šiapus jūros, ir anapus jūros. 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            479      

 

  

[Index] 

Vaičiūnaitė Judita (1937 – 2001) 
 

 
 

Born into a doctor's family in Kaunas, in 1959 she graduated from the department of 
history and philology at Vilnius University. In Vaičiūnaitė's poetry self-analysis proceeds 
against the background of modern city life and cultural myths, the poems are built upon the 
swift dynamic of changing emotions, and descriptive and musical elements are combined in a 
novel way. Vaičiūnaitė's poetry is impressionistic and visual; many of her poems describe 
both the physical and spiritual architecture of Vilnius's medieval Old City. It is precisely 
because of the care Vaičiūnaitė takes in absorbing the city – it's architecture, it's inhabitants, 
history, and character – into her poetry, that she has been termed Lithuania's only distinctly 
city poet. The images and very stuff of her poetry stands in direct contrast with the bulk of 
Lithuanian poetry, which centers itself around a rural setting and rural sensibilities. 
Vaičiūnaitė is also most closely associated with the romantic revival in Lithuanian poetry and 
writes poems which often center on themes related to women. Judita Vaičiūnaitė is considered 
one of the leading female voices in Lithuanian poetry. 

 
[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

 
Poetė Judita Vaičiūnaitė gimė Kaune, gydytojo šeimoje. 1959 m. ji baigė lituanistikos 

studijas Vilniaus universitete. Poetė apdovanota Baltijos asamblėjos premija. Vačiūnaitė 
viena iš pirmųjų Lietuvos poetų natūraliai priėmė miesto kultūros pasaulį. Jos eilėraščiuose 
labai svarbus muzikinis pradas bei muzikos ir dailės kūrinių sukelti įspūdžiai. Žvelgiant į 
poetės kūrybą, galima suprasti, kad miesto pasaulis gali būti toks pats jaukus ir poetiškas, kaip 
kitiems poetams kaimo pasaulis. Vaičiūnaitė pastebi grožį ir kasdienybėje, ir banaliose 
buitinėse smulkmenose. Jos eilėraščiuose tiksliai nusakytos detalės, įvardinti daiktai, aplinka 
ir augalai. Galima pasakyti, kad didelė dalis eilėraščių yra tarsi aistringas, pasiaukojančios ir 
išdidžios moters monologas. Poetės kūryba labai vientisa nuo pirmųjų iki paskutinių rinkinių. 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]

 

http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.booksfromlithuania.lt/bookpic/vaiciunaite.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.booksfromlithuania.lt/index.php%3Fpage_id%3D3%26action%3Dinfo%26WriterID%3D36&h=96&w=96&sz=3&hl=lt&start=13&tbnid=_5341WkDbtMDmM


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            480      

 

  

[Index] 
 

 

THE CAFE WITH PIGEONS 

 

 

KAVINĖ SU BALANDŽIAIS  

 
 

By the railroad tracks and the market, 
by the trolleybus stop under snow 
I still found the cafe with pigeons – 

old women and gypsies gather there, 
there I heard the pigeons‘ coo 

and the morning rustle of their frosted wings, 
there I picked up 
a snow feather 

from the dirty stone floor 
and took my bag, 

and, with a torn heart 
glanced swam into the distance, 

through the crossroad‘s fading stars, 
February clouds... 

 
Translated by: Laima Sruoginis 

 

 

 
Prie geležinkelio ir turgaus, 

prie troleibusų apsnigtos stotelės 
dar suradau kavinę su balandžiais –  

ten renkasi senutės ir čigonės, 
ten išgirdau balandžių ulbavimą 

ir apšarmojusių sparnų rytinį šnaresį, 
ten sniego plunksną 

nuo akmeninių purvinų grindų 
pakėliau 

ir krepšį paėmiau, 
ir, plyštant širdžiai, 

pro langą pažvelgiau –  
į tolį plaukė debesys, 

per kryžgatvių žvaigždynus 
vasario skaidrūs debesys… 

 
 

 

[Index] [Lithuanian Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            481      

 

  

[Index] 

Spanish Literature 

 

Overview 
 

The XIX Century inherits and consolidates the tradition of the XVIII century  the 
Enlightment century. All the selected authors are heirs of that intellectual movement which 
generated institutions and an increasing interest for cultural and humanistic issues. Let’s 
remember that it’s during the XVIII century when it was founded the Language Real 
Academy by Marquis of Villena.  
 

This poetic selection consists of one - or several - poems, preceded of a brief 
biographical review of the author. 

 
[Index]  

Introducción 
 

El siglo XIX hereda y consolida la tradición del XVIII, el siglo de la Ilustración. 
Todos los autores seleccionados son herederos de aquel movimiento intelectual que genera 
instituciones y un interés creciente por los temas culturales y humanísticos. Recordemos que 
es en el siglo XVIII cuando nace la Real Academia de la Lengua de la mano del Marqués de 
Villena. 
 

Esta selección poética consta de uno – o varios – poemas, precedidos de una breve 
reseña biográfica del autor. 

 
[Index] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            482      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Spanish Poets 
 

 

Agustín García Calvo
Alfonsina Storni
Amado Nervo
Antonio Machado
Blas de Otero
Carlos Castro Saavedra
Celso Emilio Ferreiro
César Vallejo
Dámaso Alonso
Delmira Agustini
Dionisio Ridruejo
Emilio Prados
Federico García Lorca
Francisco  A. de Icaza
Gabriel Celaya
Gabriela Mistral
Gerardo Diego
Guillermo Valencia
Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer
Idea Vilariño
Jorge Enrique Adoum
Jorge Guillén
José de Espronceda
José Hierro
José Martí
José Santos Chocano
Juan Eugenio Hartzenbusch

Juan Ramón Jiménez
Juana de Ibarbourou
Julio Herrera y Reissig
León Felipe
Leopoldo Lugones
Luís Alfonso Díez
Luis Cernuda
Manuel Altolaguirre
Manuel José Othón
Manuel Machado
Miguel De Unamuno
Miguel Hernández
Nicanor Parra
Nicolás Guillén
Pablo Neruda
Pedro Salinas
Rafael Alberti
Ramón Mª del Valle – Inclán
Roberto Fernández Retamar
Roque Dalton
Rosalía de Castro
Rubén Darío
Salvador Díaz Mirón
Salvador Rueda
Vicente Aleixandre y Merlo
 

 

 

[Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            483      

 

  

[Index] 

José de Espronceda (1808 – 1842) 
 

 
He was born during a trip in Almendralejo, (Badajoz), in 1808. He was son of a 

cavalry colonel, who fought against the French in the War of Independence. He studied in St. 
Mateo school of Madrid. He founded a secret society to fight against absolutism. When 
discovered, he was shut in a convent. He took active part in policy  as deputy in the 
parliament. He died of diphtheria, at 33 years old, in 1842. His life is full of adventures, 
political passions and a flaming and accurate lyrical poetry. 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nace en el curso de un viaje, en un pueblo extremeño, Almendralejo, (Badajoz), en 
1808. Hijo de un coronel de caballería que luchó contra los franceses en la guerra de la 
Independencia, estudió en el colegio San Mateo de Madrid. Fundó una sociedad secreta para 
luchar contra el absolutismo. Descubierto, fue recluido en un convento. Intervino activamente 
en política, fue diputado. Muere de difteria, a los 33 años, en 1842. Su vida está llena de 
aventuras, pasiones políticas y de una poesía lírica encendida y certera. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            484      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The Pirate’s Song 

 

 

Canción del Pirata 

The breeze fair aft, all sails on high,  
Ten guns on each side mounted seen, 

She does not cut the sea, but fly,  
A swiftly sailing brigantine; 

A pirate bark, the “Dreaded” named, 
For her surpassing boldness famed, 
On every sea well-known and shore, 

From side to side their boundaries o'er. 
 

The moon in streaks the waves illumes  
Hoarse groans the wind the rigging through; 

In gentle motion raised assumes 
The sea a silvery shade with blue; 
Whilst singing gaily on the poop 
The pirate Captain, in a group, 

Sees Europe here, there Asia lies, 
And Stamboul in the front arise. 

 
“Sail on, my swift one!  

nothing fear; 
Nor calm, nor storm,  
nor foeman's force, 

Shall make thee yield in thy career 
Or turn thee from thy course. 

 
Despite the English cruisers fleet 
We have full twenty prizes made; 

And see their flags beneath my feet 
A hundred nations laid. 

 
My treasure is my gallant bark, 

My only God is liberty; 

My law is might, the wind my mark, 

My country is the sea. 

Con diez cañones por banda, 
viento en popa a toda vela, 
no corta el mar, sino vuela 

un velero bergantín: 
Bajel pirata que llaman 

por su bravura el Temido, 
en todo mar conocido 
del uno al otro confín. 

 
La luna en el mar riela, 

en la lona gime el viento, 
y alza en blanco movimiento 

olas de plata y azul. 
Y ve el capitán pirata, 

cantando alegre en la popa, 
Asia a un lado, al otro Europa 
y allá a su frente Estambul . 

 
“ Navega velero mío, 

sin temor, 
que ni enemigo navío, 
ni tormenta ni bonanza 

tu rumbo a torcer alcanza, 
ni a sujetar tu valor. 

 
“ Veinte presas 
hemos hecho 
a despecho 
del inglés, 

y han rendido 
sus pendones 
cien naciones 

a mis pies. 
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            485      

 

  

“There blindly kings fierce wars maintain, 
For palms of land, when here I hold 

As mine, whose power no laws restrain, 
Whate'er the seas infold. 

Nor is there shore around whate'er, 
Or banner proud, but of my might 

Is taught the valorous proofs to bear,  
And made to feel my right. 

My treasure is my gallant bark, 

My only God is liberty; 

My law is might, the wind my mark, 

My country is the sea. 
“Look when a ship our signals ring, 

Full sail to fly how quick she's veered! 
For of the sea I am the king, 

My fury's to be feared; 
But equally with all I share 

Whate'er the wealth we take supplies; 
I only seek the matchless fair, 

My portion of the prize. 
My treasure is my gallant bark, 

My only God is liberty; 

My law is might, the wind my mark,  

My country is the sea. 
“I am condemned to die !—I laugh; 

For, if my fates are kindly sped, 
My doomer from his own ship's staff  

Perhaps I'll hang instead. 
And if I fall, why what is life? 
For lost I gave it then as due, 

When from slavery's yoke in strife  
A rover! I withdrew. 

My treasure is my gallant bark; 

My only God is liberty; 

My law is might, the wind my mark, 

My country is the sea. 
“My music is the Northwind's roar; 

The bellowings of the Black Sea's shore,  

“ Que es mi barco mi tesoro, 
que es mi Dios la libertad, 

mi ley la fuerza y el viento 

mi única patria la mar. 
 

“ Allá muevan feroz guerra 
ciegos reyes 

por un palmo más de tierra: 
que yo tengo aquí por mío 

cuanto abarca el mar bravío, 
a quien nadie impuso leyes. 

 
Y no hay playa, 
sea cualquiera, 

ni bandera 
de esplendor, 
que no sienta 
mi derecho 
y dé pecho 
a mi valor. 

 
“ Que es mi barco mi tesoro, 

que es mi Dios la libertad, 

mi ley la fuerza y el viento, 

mi única patria la mar. 

 

“ A la voz de “¡barco viene!” 
es de ver 

cómo vira y se previene 
a todo trapo a escapar: 

Que yo soy el rey del mar, 
y mi furia es de temer. 

 
“ En las presas 

yo divido 
lo cogido 
por igual: 

Sólo quiero 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            486      

 

  

And rolling of my guns. 
And as the thunders loudly sound,  

And furious the tempests rave, 
I calmly rest in sleep profound, 

So rocked upon the wave. 
My treasure is my gallant bark, 

My only God is liberty; 

My law is might, the wind my mark, 

My country is the sea.” 

 
Translated by: unknown  

 

por riqueza 
la belleza 
sin rival. 

 
“ Que es mi barco mi tesoro 

que es mi Dios la libertad 

mi ley la fuerza y el viento 

mi única patria la mar. 

 

“ ¡Sentenciado estoy a muerte! 
yo me río: 

No me abandone la suerte, 
y al mismo que me condena 
colgaré de alguna entena, 
quizá en su propio navío. 

 
“ Y si caigo, 

¿Qué es la vida? 
Por perdida 

ya la di, 
cuando el yugo 

del esclavo, 
como un bravo, 

sacudí. 
 

“Que es mi barco mi tesoro, 
que es mi Dios la libertad, 

mi ley la fuerza y el viento, 

mi única patria la mar. 

 

Son mi música mejor 
aquilones; 

el estrépito y temblor 
de los cables sacudidos, 

del negro mar los bramidos 
y el rugir de mis cañones. 

 
“ Y del trueno 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            487      

 

  

al son violento 
y del viento 
al rebramar, 

yo me duermo 
sosegado 
arrullado 

por la mar. 
 

“ Que es mi barco mi tesoro, 
que es mi Dios la libertad, 

mi ley la fuerza y el viento, 

mi única patria la mar. 

 

 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            488      

 

  

[Index] 

Juan Eugenio Hartzenbusch (1806-1880) 
 

 
 

He was born in Madrid, 1806. He was son of a German cabinetmaker and an 
Andalusian woman. He was member of Language Royal Academy. He translated works of 
Molière, Voltaire and Dumas. He wrote drama plays as The oath of  Santa Gadea and The 
Lovers of Teruel. He died in 1880. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nace en Madrid, 1806. Hijo de un ebanista alemán y una andaluza. Fue académico de 
la Real Academia de la Lengua. Tradujo obras de Moliere, Voltaire y Dumas. Escribe obras 
dramáticas como La jura de Santa Gadea y Los Amantes de Teruel. Muere en 1880. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            489      

 

  

[Index] 
 

To  each  time each thing 

 

A su tiempo cada cosa 

Fable 
 

A vixen went fleeing up a hill  
from a mastiff stuck to her tail. 

Over in the sky flying 
a lark sees her 

Which in the air was chirping 
without capsizing. 

−Listen!! says to the one that flees,  

my sonorous voice. 
For music we go!, the vixen said. 

Entertaining 
all wants somebody 

and because they’re not on time 
that disturbs them. 

 
Translated by: unknown  

 

Fábula 
 

Una zorra iba huyendo 
por una loma 

de un mastín que llevaba 
casi a la cola. 

Por encima volando 
la ve una alondra, 

que en el aire piaba 
muy sin zozobra. 

− Oye, dice a la que huye, 

mi voz sonora. 
¡ Para música vamos!, 

dijo la zorra. 
Divertir quiere a todos 

cierta persona, 

y por no ser a tiempo 

los incomoda. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            490      

 

  

[Index] 

Antonio Machado (1875 – 1939) 
 

 
 

"My childhood are memories of a courtyard of Seville". He was born in Seville in 
1875. He moved to Madrid with his parents and brothers and he studied at the Institute of Free 
Teaching . In 1907 he obtained the French chair at the Secondary Institute of Soria. He was 
soon moved to Baeza and to Segovia where he developed an intense activity of popular 
culture. He was an elected Member of the Real Academy of Language. In Madrid he has 
caught by surprise by the Civil War. Partisan of the Republic, near the end of the war, he went 
into exile in France in a small hotel of Collioure, where the poet died in 1939 "... light of 
luggage /, almost naked, like the sons of the sea". 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 

 
“Mi infancia son recuerdos de un patio de Sevilla”. En Sevilla nació en 1875. Con sus 

padres y hermanos  se traslada a Madrid y estudia en la Institución Libre de Enseñanza.. En 
1907 obtiene la cátedra de francés en el Instituto de Soria. Se traslada a Baeza y luego a 
Segovia en donde desarrolla una intensa actividad de cultura popular . Es elegido miembro  de 
la Real Academia de la Lengua. En Madrid le sorprende la Guerra Civil . Partidario de la 
República , cerca del final , se refugia en Francia en un hotelito de Collioure, donde muere el 
poeta en 1939 “...ligero de equipaje / casi desnudo, como los hijos del mar”. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            491      

 

  

[Index] 
 

On solitudes 

 

 

De las soledades 

 
Daydreams have endlessly turning 

paths going over the bitter 
earth, winding roads, 

parks flowering, in darkness and in silence; 
 

deep vaults, ladders against the stars; 
scenes of hopes and memories. 

Tiny figures that walk past and smile 
—sad playthings for an old man—; 

 
friends we think we can see 

at the flowery turn in the road 
and imaginary creatures 

that show us roads... far off... 
 

Translated by: Robert Bly

 

Sobre la tierra amarga, 
caminos tiene el sueño 

laberínticos, sendas tortuosas, 
parques en flor y en sombra y en silencio; 

 
criptas hondas, escalas sobre estrellas; 

retablos de esperanzas y recuerdos. 
Figurillas que pasan y sonríen 

—juguetes melancólicos de viejo—; 
 

imágenes amigas, 
a la vuelta florida del sendero, 

y quimeras rosadas 
que hacen camino... lejos.. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            492      

 

  

[Index] 

Manuel Altolaguirre (1906 – 1959 
 

 
 

He was born in Malaga, in 1905, he was  the youngest child belonging to the poetic 
group of the 27. He married to the poetess Concha Méndez, with whom he published essential 
poetry books in the "Hero" collection. Since the Spanish Civil War he lived in Cuba and 
Mexico, where he became scriptwriter, producer and cinema director. He returned to Spain in 
1959, but he died in a car accident. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 

 
Nace en Málaga en 1905, es el benjamín del grupo poético del 27.Se casó con la 

poetisa Concha Méndez, con la cual editó libros fundamentales de poesía en la colección 
“Héroe”. Desde la guerra vivió en Cuba y en México, donde fue guionista, productor y 
director de cine. Regresa a España en 1959, pero muere en un accidente de automóvil. Obras: 
Las islas invitadas, Fin de un amor, Poemas de América, Soledades juntas, etc. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            493      

 

  

[Index] 
 

I only know I’m in my inner self 

 

 

Solo sé que estoy en mi 

 
I know only I am in myself 

and I will k never know who I am, 
neither I know where I go 

neither till when I will be here. 
 

Dressed with life or death 
or dressed without dying, 

on the walls of this huge castle 
of my living 

 
or  free by the sepulchral confines 

of the skies, 
tearing off grey veils, 
ignorant of my aims 

 
I do not know which jail waits 

neither the liberty I desire, 
neither which dream will the river 

of my life give when I die. 

 
 

Translated by: unknown  
 

Sólo sé que estoy en mi 
y nunca sabré quién soy, 
tampoco sé adónde voy 

ni hasta cuándo estaré aquí. 
 

Vestido con vida o muerte 
o vestido sin morir, 

en los muros de este fuerte 
castillo de mi vivir, 

 
o libre por los confines 

sepulcrales de los cielos, 
desgarrando grises velos, 

ignorante de mis fines, 
 

no sé qué cárcel espera 
ni la libertad que ansío, 

ni a qué sueño dará el río 
de mi vida cuando muera. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            494      

 

  

[Index] 

Emilio Prados (1899 – 1962 ) 
 

 
 

Emilio Prados was born in Malaga in 1899. Both him and Altolaguirre published the 
magazine "Litoral" and essential books of the group of the 27. During the Republic he joined 
to the revolutionary tasks of intellectuals. He participated in the Defense of Madrid. Since 
1939 he lived in Mexico, exiled, where he died in 1962. His poetic beginnings are influenced 
by J. R. Jiménez. He had a surrealistic  stage followed up by a brief stage of political and exile 
poetry. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nace Emilio Prados en Málaga en 1899. Con Altolaguirre  edita la revista “ Litoral” y 
libros fundamentales del grupo del 27. Durante la República se suma alas tareas de 
intelectuales revolucionarios. Participa en la defensa de Madrid. Desde 1939 vive en México, 
en el exilio, donde murió en 1962.Sus comienzos poéticos están marcados por la influencia de 
J.R.Jiménez.. Tiene una etapa surrealista, le sigue una breve etapa de poesía política y el 
exilio. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            495      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Besieged city 
 

Romance of the defense of madrid 

 

Ciudad sitiada 
 

Romance de la defensa de Madrid 

 
Among cannons I look at myself, 

among cannons I move: 
Castles of my reason 

and borders of my dream, 
¿ where entrails begins 

and where finishes the wind? 
I do not have pulse in my veins, 

but buzzes of thunder, 
whirlwinds that pull me out 
to the jungles of my nerves; 

crowds that push me, 
eyes that burn my fire, 

puffs of victory, 
hymns of blood and steel, 

birds that fight me 
and raise my forehead to their sky 
and burning they leave the clouds 

and trembling my ground. 
There they go!  Heavy masses 

cross my veins of iron; 
all my firmness awaits 

taken cover in my bones. 
Comrades of the present, 
ghosts of my memories, 

hopes of my hands 
and homesickness of my games: 

All standing to defend me, 
that my life is under  siege; 
that the truth is besieged 
threatened in my chest! 

Quickly the barricades at staring, 
that the heart is burning! 
They should not put out 

 
Entre cañones me miro, 

entre cañones me muevo: 
castillos de mi razón 

y fronteras de mi sueño, 
¿ dónde comienza la entraña 

y dónde termina el viento? 
No tengo pulso en mis venas, 

sino zumbidos de trueno, 
torbellinos que me arrastran 

por las selvas de mis nervios; 
multitudes que me empujan, 
ojos que queman mi fuego, 

bocanadas de victoria, 
himnos de sangre y acero, 
pájaros que me combaten 
y alzan mi frente a su cielo 
y ardiendo dejan las nubes 

y tembloroso mi suelo. 
¡Allá van! Pesadas moles 

cruzan mis venas de hierro; 
toda mi firmeza aguarda 

parapetada en mis huesos. 
Compañeros del presente, 

fantasmas de mis recuerdos, 
esperanzas de mis manos 
y nostalgias de mis juegos: 

¡Todos en pie a defenderme, 
que está mi vida en asedio; 
que está la verdad sitiada 
amenazada en mi pecho! 

¡ Pronto, en pie las barricadas, 
que el corazón está ardiendo! 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            496      

 

  

black shots of ice. 
Quickly!, quickly, my blood, 

whirl me entirely! 
Raise all my weapons; 

look it waits in its centre, 
trembling, a mass of flames 

that no longer fits in my fence! 
Quickly, to the arms, my blood, 

the fire covers me all ! 
Who dare to threaten it, 

coal will become his dream. 
Oh, city, city besieged, 
city of my own chest, 

if the enemy steps on  you, 
first I should see myself dead! 

 
Castles of my reason 

and borders of my dream, 
my city is besieged: 

Among cannons I move. 
Where do you begin, Madrid, 

or is, Madrid, my body? 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

No han de llegar a apagarlo 
negros disparos de hielo. 

¡ Pronto, de prisa, mi sangre, 
arremolíname entero! 

¡ Levanta todas mis armas; 
mira que aguarda en su centro, 
temblando, un turbión de llamas 

que ya no cabe en mi cerco! 
¡ Pronto, a las armas, mi sangre, 

que ya me rebosa el  fuego! 
Quien se atreva a amenazarlo, 

tizón se le hará su sueño. 
 

¡Ay , ciudad, ciudad sitiada, 
ciudad de mi propio pecho, 

si te pisa el enemigo, 
antes he de verme muerto! 

 
Castillos de mi razón 

y fronteras de mi sueño, 
mi ciudad está sitiada: 

entre cañones me muevo. 
¿ Dónde comienzas, Madrid, 

o es, Madrid, que eres mi cuerpo? 
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            497      

 

  

[Index] 

Miguel Hernández (1910 - 1942) 
 

 
 

He was born in Orihuela (Alicante) in 1910. With a farmer origin and self taught 
person, his poetry derived to the social and political commitment. With the Pedagogical 
Missions he went across small towns and villages of the Spanish rural land, giving 
information and culture to the most underprivileged and excluded people. In 1942 at 31 years 
old, he died in the prison of Alicante. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Orihuela en 1910. De origen campesino y formación autodidacta, su poesía 
derivó al compromiso social y político. Con las Misiones Pedagógicas recorrió pueblos y 
aldeas del campo español, llevando información y cultura a los más desfavorecidos. En 1942, 
a los 31 años, muere en la cárcel de Alicante. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            498      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Olive Pickers 

 

 

Aceituneros 

 
Andalusian of Jaén, 

arrogant olive pickers, 
tell me with the hand in  your heart, who, 

who grew up  the olives? 
The nothing didn’t grow them up, 
neither the money, nor the lord, 

but the quiet land, 
the work and sweat. 
United to pure water 

and to the united planets, 
the three gave the beauty 

to the twisted trunks. 
Raise up! You!  grey olive, 

they said at the  foot of the wind. 
And the olive raised a powerful hand 

and laid its foundation. 
Andalusian of Jaén, 

arrogant olive pickers, 
tell me with your heart, who, 
who breast-fed the olives? 

Your blood, your life, 
not that of the exploiter 

who was enriched 
in the generous wound of the sweat. 

Not that of the landowner 
who  buried you in the poverty, 

who stamped on your front head, 
who reduced your head. 

Trees to which you consecrated 
with eagerness in mid day of the day, 

you are the beginning of a loaf of bread 
only by other eaten. 

How many centuries of olive harvest, 
the feet and hands imprisoned 

Andaluces de Jaén, 
aceituneros altivos, 

decidme en el alma: ¿quién, 
quien levantó los olivos? 
No los levantó la nada, 
ni el dinero, ni el señor, 

sino la tierra callada, 
el trabajo y el sudor. 
Unidos al agua pura 

y a los planetas unidos, 
los tres dieron la hermosura 

de los troncos retorcidos. 
Levántate, olivo cano, 

dijeron al pie del viento. 
y el olivo alzó una mano 
poderosa de cimiento. 
Andaluces de Jaén, 
aceituneros altivos, 

decidme en el alma: ¿quién 
amamantó los olivos? 

Vuestra sangre, vuestra vida, 
no la del explotador 

que se enriqueció en la herida 
generosa del sudor. 

No la del terrateniente 
que os sepultó en la pobreza, 

que os pisoteó la frente, 
que os redujo la cabeza. 
Árboles que vuestro afán 
consagró al centro del día 
eres principio de un pan 
que sólo el otro comía. 

¡ Cuántos siglos de aceituna, 
los pies y las manos presos, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            499      

 

  

from sun to sun and from moon to moon, 
they weigh over your bones! 

Andalusian of Jaén, 
arrogant olive pickers, 

my soul inquires: Whose, 
whose are those olives? 

Jaén, raise up brave 
on your moon stones, 
don’t become slave 

with all your olive trees. 
Inside the transparency 

of the oil and its fragrances, 
they show your liberty 
the liberty of your hills. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

sol a sol y luna a luna, 
pesan sobre vuestros huesos! 

Andaluces de Jaén, 
aceituneros altivos, 

pregunta mi alma: ¿ de quién, 
de quién son esos olivos? 

Jaén, levántate brava 
sobre tus piedras lunares, 

no vayas a ser esclava 
con todos tus olivares. 
Dentro de la claridad 

del aceite y sus aromas, 
indican tu libertad 

la libertad de tus lomas. 

 
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            500      

 

  

[Index] 

Dámaso Alonso (1898 – 1990) 
 

 

 
 

He was born in Madrid in 1898. He was a disciple and collaborator of Menéndez 
Pidal. He belonged to the Generation of 27. He taught Spanish Language and Literature in 
German, English and North American universities. In 1933 he won  the chair of the 
University of Valencia. After the war, he obtained the chair of Roman Philology in Madrid. 
He was member of the Royal Academy of Language and of the Academy of History. He died 
in 1990. A Lyrical purity characterizes his initial work. The protest tone reaches the summit 
work of the author in Children of the wrath (Hijos de la ira), to which the poem below 
belongs to. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Madrid en 1898. Fue discípulo y colaborador de Menéndez Pidal. Formó 
parte de la Generación de 27. Enseñó Lengua y Literatura españolas en universidades 
alemanas, inglesas y norteamericanas. En 1933 obtiene la cátedra de la Universidad de 
valencia. Tras la guerra, la cátedra de Filología románica en Madrid.  Fue miembro de la Real 
Academia de la Lengua y de la Academia de la Historia. Muere en 1990. Pureza lírica 
caracteriza su obra inicial. El tono de protesta llena la obra cumbre del autor, Hijos de la ira, a 
la que pertenece el poema. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            501      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The Injustice 

 

 

La injusticia 

 
From what abyss you emerge, black shadow? 

What do look for? 
the hillocks, 

as green lizards, appear in the valleys 
that sink among fogs in the infancy of the world. 

And they nap, open, the flocks, 
while the light beats, always recently created, 

while blond time bends mastiff sleeps 
at God’s gates. 

But you come, murky spot, 
kingdom of the caverns, galloping in the north wind, 

after your curved pupils, projected 
as two growing meteors of the dark thing, 

flagellating the summits with hairs of snakes, 
whips of hail. 

 
You arrive, 

devouring hollowness of centuries and of worlds, 
as an immense tomb, 

pushed by furies which introduce their foreheads, 
hard erect goats, without ears, without eyes 

which tenderness ignore. 
 

If from  the abyss you arrive, 
dark sun of blackness, you  arrive always, 

murky wave, without end, endless flow, 
opposed to love, when she’s born 

in the first day. 
 

You blur with your hand 
of humid night the tepid glass 

where blue shows the transparent childhood, 
when barely 

happiness was tender, the light performed itself 

¿De qué sima te yergues, sombra negra? 
¿Qué buscas? 

Los oteros, 
como lagartos verdes, se asoman a los valles 

que se hunden entre nieblas en la infancia del mundo. 
Y sestean, abiertos, los rebaños, 

mientras la luz palpita, siempre recién creada, 
mientras se comba el tiempo rubio mastín que duerme 

a las puertas de Dios. 
Pero tú vienes, mancha lóbrega, 

reino de las cavernas, galopante en el cierzo, tras 
tus corvas pupilas, proyectadas 

como dos meteoros crecientes de lo oscuro, 
cabalgando en las rojas melenas del ocaso, 

flagelando las cumbres 
con cabellos de sierpes, látigos de granizo. 

 
Llegas, 

oquedad devorante de siglos y  de mundos, 
como una inmensa tumba, 

empujada por furias que ahíncan sus testuces, 
duros chivos erectos, sin oídos, sin ojos. 

que la terneza ignoran. 
 

Si,  del abismo llegas, 
hosco sol de negruras, llegas siempre, 

onda turbia, sin fin, sin fin manante, 
contraria del amor, cuando él nacida 

en el día primero. 
 

Tú empañas con tu mano 
de húmeda noche los cristales tibios 

donde el azul se asoma la niñez transparente, 
cuando apenas 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            502      

 

  

and you put in the clear look 
the first green flame 

of the murky swamps. 
 

You pile hatred in the wintry pond 
of the heart of the old one, 

and provoke the fright 
of its sad pack abandoned 

which barks furiously in the bottom of the forest. 

 
 

Translated by:  dabne

 

era tierna la dicha, se estrenaba la luz, 
y pones en la nítida mirada 

la primera llama verde 
de los turbios pantanos. 

 
Tú amontonas el odio en la charca inverniza 

del corazón del viejo, 
y azuzas el espanto 

de su triste jauría abandonada 
que ladra furibunda en el hondón del bosque. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            503      

 

  

[Index] 

Rafael Alberti (1902 – 1999) 
 

 
 

He was born in Puerto de Santa Maria (Cádiz) in 1902. He moved to Madrid in 1917 
and at the Residence of Students he met writers and artists He won the National prize of 
Literature in 1925 for his book Sailor in land. He published in 1929 “On the angels”. In 1930 
he was married to the also  writer Mª Teresa Leon. When Spanish Civil War blow he took 
part for the Popular Front; he was the secretary of the Alliance of Antifascist Intellectuals, and 
he founded the magazine the Blue Overall. At the end of the war he went into exile to France, 
Argentina, Uruguay and Rome. He came back to Spain in 1977. He awarded the Cervantes 
Prize in 1983. 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 
 

Nació en el Puerto de Santa  María en 1902. Se trasladó a Madrid en 1917 y entró en 
relación con los escritores y artistas de la Residencia de Estudiantes. Premio Nacional de 
Literatura en 1925 por su libro Marinero en tierra. Publica en 1929 Sobre los ángeles. En 
1930 se casa con la escritora Mª Teresa  León . Al estallar la Guerra Civil española intervino a 
favor del Frente Popular ; secretario de la Alianza de Intelectuales Antifascistas, fundó la 
revista El Mono Azul. Al fin de la guerra se exilió en Francia, Argentina, Uruguay y Roma. 
Regresa a España en 1977. Fue Premio Cervantes 1983. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            504      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Baku 
 

(Caspian Sea.  Black sea) 

 

Baku 
 

(Mar Caspio. Mar Negro) 

 
But the sea ...High  dirty sea of gasoline, 
of petroleum hidden under the low tide. 

Listen.  They are the men, without shadow, of the mine. 
The land requires firing its voice to shout. 

 
Blind sad ghosts of fright and of woods 

we forget that they were born to split and to explore. 
Listen.  Who explodes the wells and kettles? 

Dead of thirst, the rains emigrate through the sea. 
But the air. ..Such   air which was so high a day, 

between oils and wheels you will listen them agonize. 
Listen.  Who goes hidden through the tubing? 
Also the sky wants through sea run to the sea. 

For the living bird the branches died, 
the grass tried to birth and breathe. 

Who dominates the centres of the world and of the flames? 
The men! 

And the petroleum goes from a sea to another sea. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Pero el mar ...Alto mar sucio de gasolina, 

de petróleo escondido bajo la bajamar. 
Escucha. Son los hombres, sin sombra, de la mina. 

La tierra exige al fuego su voz para gritar. 
 

Ciegos fantasmas tristes de espanto y de maderas 
se olvidan que nacieron para hender y explorar. 
Escucha. ¿Quién estalla los pozos y calderas? 
Muertas de sed, las lluvias emigran por la mar. 

 
Pero el aire...Aquel aire que fue tan alto un día, 

entre aceites  y ruedas lo oirás agonizar. 
Escucha. ¿Quién oculto va por la tubería? 

También el cielo quiere por el mar irse al mar. 
 

Para el pájaro vivo se murieron las ramas, 
las yerbas intentaron nacer y respirar. 

¿Quién domina los centros del mundo y de las llamas? 
¡Los hombres! 

Y el petróleo va de un mar a otro mar. 
 

 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            505      

 

  

[Index] 

José Hierro (1922-2002) 
 

 
 

He was born in Madrid in 1922. He spent his childhood and youth in Santander, where 
he became a member of poetic group called "Proel" In 1947 he published his two first books: 
Earth without us and Joy. The existential pain fills its verses: With stones, with the wind 
(1950), and Quinta of the 42 (1952). He opened to the pain of others and wrote poems that 
bordered the social poetry, without diminishing its aesthetic exigency, and neither its richness. 
Works: Whatever I know of me (1959), Agenda, (1991). For his work he was awarded with 
the Cervantes Prize. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Madrid en 1922. Pasa su infancia y juventud en Santander, donde forma 
parte del grupo poético “ Proel”. En 1947 publica sus dos primeros libros: Tierra sin nosotros 
y alegría. El dolor existencial llena sus versos. Con las piedras, con el viento (1950) y Quinta 
del 42 (1952 ). Se abre al dolor de los demás y escribe poemas que lindan con la poesía social, 
sin disminuir su exigencia estética, ni su riqueza. Obras: Cuanto sé de mí (1959), Agenda, 
(1991). Por su obra recibió el Premio Cervantes. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets]



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            506      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Lamentation 

 

Lamentación 
 

We have had so many things to say, 
and they were not told! 

 
Prodigious young words 

to injure the old ears. 
Marvellous melodies, 
unpublished songs. 

We have all together sung 
and we’ve cried in silence. 

We learned very tough science 
at the cost of our own dreams. 

 
We have had so many things 
to say, and they were not told! 

We have saved so happy 
somber premonitions¡ 

We have loved each stem, 
each cold rag of winter, 

each drop of early morning 
with so crazy avidity, knowing 
that we were meat of a fable 

that someone lived in the mystery! 
So beautiful songs! 

So ardent gusts that wounded us. 
Music of interior stars 

that were born in our kingdom. 
Flutes played, in the afternoon, 

by the vague hands of the dream. 
And so many clean beauties 

as fell! 
And to rotate without end in the dawn 

with the dark word inside, 
with the to sing to flower of life 

ignoring the remote term. 

 
¡Hemos tenido tantas cosas 
que decir, y no se dijeron! 

 
Prodigiosas palabras jóvenes 

para herir los oídos viejos. 
Maravillosas melodías, 

cantos inéditos. 
Hemos cantado todos juntos 

y hemos llorado en el silencio. 
Aprendimos muy dura ciencia 
a costa de los propios sueños. 

 
¡Hemos tenido tantas cosas 
que decir, y no se dijeron! 

¡ Hemos salvado tan alegres 
los sombríos presentimientos ¡ 

Hemos amado cada tallo, 
cada frío harapo de invierno, 

cada gota de madrugada 
con tan loca avidez, sabiendo 

que éramos carne de una fábula. 
que alguien vivía en el misterio! 

¡ Tan  hermosas canciones! Ráfagas 
tan ardientes que nos hirieron . 

Música de astros interiores 
que nacían en nuestro reino. 
Flautas tañidas, en la tarde, 

por las manos vagas del sueño. 
¡ Y tantas limpias hermosuras 

como cayeron! 
Y girar sin fin en el alba 

con la oscura palabra dentro, 
con el cantar a flor de vida 

ignorando el remoto término. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            507      

 

  

 
We have had so many things 

that to say, and themselves they were not told! 
And we look at how in the air 
the music without owner flies, 

without we can rush it 
with our clumsy instruments. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
¡ Hemos tenido tantas cosas 

que decir, y no se dijeron! 
Y miramos cómo en el aire 
vuela la música sin dueño, 
sin que podamos apresarla 

con nuestros torpes instrumentos. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            508      

 

  

[Index] 

Jorge Guillén (1893 – 1984) 
 

 
 

He was born in Valladolid. He completed his education in Switzerland. In Madrid and 
Granada he received his master's degree in Philosophy and Letters. He was a lecturer  of 
Spanish at the Sorbona, where he knew Paul Valéry. Later he went to the University of 
Oxford. He occupied the chair of Spanish Literature in Murcia and Seville, where the Civil 
War caught him in surprise. He went into exile in 1938 to the United States. He was awarded 
with the Cervantes Prize in 1976 and the following year he returned to Spain. 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Valladolid. Completó su educación en Suiza. En Madrid y Granada se 
licenció en Filosofía y Letras. Fue lector de español en la Sorbona, donde conoció a Paul 
Valéry. Más tarde estuvo en la Universidad de Oxford. Ocupó la cátedra de Literatura 
española en Murcia y Sevilla, donde le sorprendió la Guerra Civil. Se exilió en 1938 en 
Estados Unidos. Recibió el Premio Cervantes en 1976 y al año siguiente regresó a España. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            509      

 

  

[Index] 
 

THE BALANCE 
(In these years of storm) 

 

EL BALANCE 
(En estos años de tormenta) 

 
The years they spend and the fatal balance 
is imposed already to the most unprepared. 

What did I propose, what I achieved, that reach 
they had my sharpness, my senses? 

 
It’s useless that always an astute way 

to lie me unfold its sophisms. 
With the truth at end no longer I discuss. 

My illusions today are not the same. 
 

The illusion of being remains me 
who is worth more than the own result? 

The experience returns to the catechism. 
My being is my living accumulated. 

 
If a great gift was lost, if was not swum. 

For consolation the pride will grow. 
A power thus squandered 

favors monolog and murmur. 
 

That of really humble it puts the weight 
of his to be in his to do: I am my sum. 

Of pretension to reality return. 
I press of the swell fades foam. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Pasan los años y el fatal balance 

se impone ya a los más desprevenidos. 
¿Qué me propuse, qué logré, que alcance 

tuvieron mi agudeza, mis sentidos? 
 

Es inútil que un modo siempre astuto 
de mentirme despliegue  sus sofismas. 

Con la verdad al fin ya no discuto. 
Mis ilusiones hoy no son las mismas. 

 
¿ Me queda la ilusión de ser yo mismo 

quien vale más que el propio resultado? 
La experiencia retorna al catecismo. 

Mi ser es mi vivir acumulado. 
 

Si se perdió un gran don, si no fue nada. 
Para consuelo crecerá el orgullo. 
Una potencia así despilfarrada 
favorece monólogo y murmullo. 

 
El de veras humilde pone el peso 

de su ser en su hacer: yo soy mi suma. 
De pretensión a realidad regreso. 

Pulso del oleaje esfuma espuma.. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            510      

 

  

[Index] 

Blas de Otero (1916 – 1979) 
 

 
 

He was born in Bilbao in 1917. He finished high school in Madrid and Law in 
Valladolid. He travelled through Spain, France, Russia, China and Cuba. The works of Blas 
de Otero is transformed "from I to the We", in three stages: he will speak of his personal, 
existential and religious problems; later his social poetry with the collective problems; at last 
the search of new ways would be remarkable in his work.  
Works: Cuatro Poemas, Poesías en Burgos y  Cántico espiritual  (1942). Ángel fieramente 
humano (1950), Redoble de conciencia (1951). 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Bilbao, en 1917. Cursó el bachillerato en Madrid y Derecho en Valladolid. 
Viaja por España , Francia, Rusia ,China y Cuba. La obra de Blas de Otero se resume “del yo 
al nosotros”, en tres etapas: hablará de sus problemas personales, existenciales y religiosos. 
Después su poesía social con los problemas colectivos. Al final se advertirá en su obra la 
búsqueda de nuevos caminos. Obras: Cuatro Poemas, Poesías en Burgos y  Cántico espiritual  
(1942). Ángel fieramente humano (1950), Redoble de conciencia (1951). 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            511      

 

  

[Index] 
 

CHILDREN OF THE LAND 

 

HIJOS DE LA TIERRA 
 

Seems as if the world walked backwards 
towards the enormous night of the cliffs. 

That a man, on the shoulders of fear, climbed for the hairy 
skirts 

of the death, with the eyes closed. 
 

Europe, piled on Spain, destroyed to rubble, 
without any north, North America, falling up; 

newborn, Russia, shoulders bleeding ; 
East, stumbling, and the rest  to drift. 

 
It seems as if the world looked at me, 

that meant I don’t know what, on the knees; 
rise hands to the sky, gives me to smell its bunches 

of dead people, between shouts and a shake of splinters. 
 

The sea, standing up, 
hits him in the throat with a green whip; 

suddenly he’s beaten throwing foam by the mouth, bites him. 
 

It seems as if the world was finished, it sank. 
It seems as if God, with open eyes, 

to the children of the man eate their  eyes 
(It doesn’t suffice–it  seems – the eyes of the dead people) 

 
Europe, on the shoulders of Spain, hungry and alone; 

the States of America, leaving mother off 
the flag of Russia, oh fishing line from wave to wave; 

Asia, the immense arrow that the future drill. 
 

You raise the womb to the sky,  oh children of the land; 
set off giving shouts of fright! 

The twenty-three million of dead in the war 
they  crowd in front of a sky completely closed . 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Parece como si el mundo caminase de espaldas 

hacia la noche enorme de los acantilados . 
Que un hombre, a hombros del miedo, trepase por las 

faldas 
hirsutas de la muerte, con los ojos cerrados. 

 
Europa, amontonada sobre España, en escombros; 

sin norte, Norteamérica, cayéndose hacia arriba; 
recién nacida, Rusia, sangrándole los hombros; 
Oriente, dando tumbos; y el resto, a la deriva. 

 
Parece como si el mundo me mirase a los ojos, 

que quisiera decirme no sé qué, de rodillas; 
alza al cielo las manos, me da a oler sus manojos 
de muertos, entre gritos y un trepidar de astillas. 

 
El mar, puesto de pie, 

le pega en la garganta con un látigo verde; 
le descantilla; de 

repente, echando espuma por la boca, le muerde. 
 

Parece como si el mundo se acabase, se hundiera. 
Parece como si Dios, con los ojos abiertos, 
a los hijos del hombre los ojos les comiera. 

( No le bastan – parece – los ojos de los muertos.) 
 

Europa, a hombros de España, hambrienta y sola; 
los Estados de América , saliéndose de madre; 

la bandera de Rusia, oh sedal de ola en ola; 
Asia, la inmensa flecha que el futuro taladre. 

 
¡ Alzad al cielo el vientre, oh hijos de la tierra; 
salid por esas calles dando gritos de espanto! 
Los veintitrés millones de muertos en la guerra 
se agolpan ante un cielo cerrado a cal y canto. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            512      

 

  

[Index] 

Pedro Salinas (1891 – 1951) 
 

 
 

He was born in Madrid. He had the master's degree in letters at the University of 
Madrid. He was lecturer of Spanish at the Sorbona and at the University of Cambridge. He 
occupied the chair of Language and Spanish Literature in Seville and Murcia. In 1923 he 
published his first poem book: Omens (Presagios). Surely chance (1929), Fable and sign 
(1931), The voice to you due (1924) and Reason of love (1936). He participated in the 
foundation of the International Menéndez Pelayo University. When the Spanish Civil war 
blow he went into exile to the United States. He died in Boston in 1951 and buried in Puerto 
Rico. 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Madrid. Se licenció en letras  en la Universidad de Madrid. Fue lector de 
español en la Sorbona y en la Universidad de Cambridge. Ocupó la cátedra de Lengua y 
Literatura española en Sevilla y Murcia. En 1923 publicó su primer libro de poemas: 
Presagios. Seguro azar (1929), Fábula y signo (1931), La voz a ti debida (1924) y Razón de 
amor (1936). Participó en la creación de la Universidad Internacional Menéndez  Pelayo. Al 
estallar la guerra Civil, se exilió a Estados Unidos. Murió en Boston en 1951 y enterrado en 
Puerto Rico. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            513      

 

  

[Index] 
 

ZERO 

 

CERO 
(he refers to the atomic bomb  

in Hiroshima in 1945) 
 

Of  I 
An Invitation to a cry. This is a cry, 

eyes, without end, crying, 
dump ahead, by the ruins 

of uncountable days. 
Ruins that spreads a zero – author of nothing , 

man’s work-, a zero, when it explodes.. 
Fell blind.  Freed it, 

they freed it, to six thousand 
meters of height, at four o'clock. 

Are there any eyes whose earth’s delicacies 
distinguish since heights? 
Happy world? plots, lives, 

which knit and unravel 
butterflies, men, tigers, 

loving and unloving...  [..] 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

(Se refiere a la bomba atómica  
lanzada en Hiroshima en 1945) 

 
De   I 

Invitación al llanto. Esto es un llanto, 
ojos, sin fin, llorando, 

escombrera adelante, por las ruinas 
de innumerables días. 

Ruinas que esparce un cero – autor de nadas, 
obra del hombre - , un cero, cuando estalla.. 

Cayó ciega. La soltó, 
la soltaron, a seis mil 

metros de altura, a las cuatro. 
¿Hay ojos que le distingan 

a la tierra sus primores 
desde tan alto? 

¿Mundo feliz? tramas, vidas, 
que se tejen, se destejen, 

mariposas, hombres, tigres, 
amándose, desamándose. [...] 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            514      

 

  

[Index] 

Federico García Lorca (1898 – 1936) 
 

 
 

He was born in Fuentevaqueros (Granada), his father was a rich countryman from 
Grenade and his mother a teacher of school. He finished high school at the Grammar school 
of Granada, and received the master's degree in Philosophy and Letters and in Law. He 
studied music with Manuel de Falla, he played the  piano and the guitar. In 1918, he published 
his first book, Impressions and landscapes, of poetic prose. He moved to Madrid and he 
settled in the Residence of Students, where he was related to the writers and artists of the 
time. He founded the travelling theatre called “La Barraca”. He wrote and he represented 
countless plays: The house of Bernarda Alba, The prodigious shoemaker's wife, Yerma, 
Mariana Pineda, Weddings of blood. Poetic works: Songs, 1927, The gypsy Romancero, 
1928, A Poet in New York, 1929. After the Civil War blow he was arrested and shot in 
Granada in 1936. With his death Spain lost one of the greatest poets and dramatists of its 
history. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Fuentevaqueros (Granada), hijo de un rico agricultor granadino y de una 
maestra de escuela. Terminó el bachillerato en el Liceo de Granada. Se licenció en Filosofía y 
Letras y en Derecho. Estudió música con Manuel de falla, tocaba el piano y la guitarra. En 
1918, publicó su primer libro, Impresiones y paisajes., de prosa poética. Se trasladó a Madrid 
y se instaló en la Residencia de Estudiantes, donde se relacionó con los escritores y artistas de 
la época. Fundó el teatro ambulante “ La Barraca”. Escribió y representó obras de teatro 
incomparables: La casa de Bernarda Alba, La zapatera prodigiosa, Yerma, Mariana Poned, 
Bodas de sangre. Obras poéticas: Canciones, 1927, el Romancero gitano, 1928, Poeta en 
Nueva York, 1929.Tras estallar la Guerra Civil, fue detenido y fusilado en Granada en 1936. 
Con su muerte España perdió a uno de los mayores poetas y dramaturgos de su historia. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            515      

 

  

[Index] 
 

A SHOUT TOWARDS ROME 

 

GRITO HACIA ROMA 
From  "Poet in New York" 

(From the tower of the Crysler Building) 
 

Blocks lightly injured 
by the fine silver sprats, 

almond-shaped clouds by a hand of choir 
which carries in the spine an almond of fire, 

fish of arsenic as sharks, 
sharks like drops of tears to blind a multitude, 

roses that wound 
and needles installed in the pipes of blood, 

enemy worlds and loves covered with worms 
will fall on you.  They will fall on the great dome 

which cover with oil the military tongues 
where a man urinates in a dazzling pigeon 

and splits  coal pounded 
surrounded by thousands of hand bells. 

 
Because there is neither who gives out the bread and the 

wine, 
nor who cultivate herbs in the mouth of the dead 

neither who opens the linens of the rest, 
nor who cries through the wounds of the elephants. 

There are no more than a million blacksmiths 
forging chains for the children that should come. 

There are no more than a million carpenters 
which build coffins without cross. 

There is no more than a mob of laments 
which open the clothes waiting for the bullet 

The man that despises the pigeon should speak, 
should scream  naked among the columns, 

and to put an injection to get the leprosy 
and cry a terrible cry 

that unsolved his rings and his phones of diamond. 
But the man dressed in  white 
ignores the mystery of the ear, 

De “Poeta en Nueva Cork” 
(desde la torre del Crysler  Building) 

 
Manzanas levemente heridas 

por los finos espadines de plata, 
nubes rasgadas por una mano de coral 

que lleva en el dorso una almendra de fuego, 
peces de arsénico como tiburones, 

tiburones como gotas de llanto para cegar una multitud, 
rosas que hieren 

y agujas instaladas en los caños de la sangre, 
mundos enemigos y amores cubiertos de gusanos 

caerán sobre ti. Caerán sobre la gran cúpula 
que untan de aceite las lenguas militares 

donde un hombre se orina en una deslumbrante paloma 
y escupe carbón machacado 

rodeado de miles de campanillas. 
 

Porque ya no hay quien reparta el pan y el vino, 
ni quien cultive hierbas en la boca del muerto, 

ni quien abra los linos del reposo, 
ni quien llore por las heridas de los elefantes. 

No hay más que un millón de herreros 
forjando cadenas para los niños que han de venir. 

No hay más que un millón de carpinteros 
que hacen ataúdes sin cruz. 

No hay más que un gentío de lamentos 
que se abren la ropa en espera de la bala. 

El hombre que desprecia la paloma debía hablar, 
debía gritar desnudo entre las columnas, 

y poner una inyección para adquirir la lepra 
y llorar un llanto tan terrible 

que disolviera sus anillos y sus teléfonos de diamante. 
Pero el hombre vestido de blanco 

ignora el misterio de la espiga, 
ignora el gemido de la parturienta, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            516      

 

  

he ignores the moan of the parturient one, 
he ignores that Christ can give still water, 

ignores that the coin burns the kiss of prodigy 
and gives the blood of the lamb to the  idiot peak of the 

pheasant. 
 

The teachers teach the children 
a marvellous light that comes from the hills; 

but what arrives is a meeting of sewers 
where the dark nymphs shout of rage. 

The teachers indicate with devotion the enormous domes 
perfumed; 

but under the statues there is not love, 
there is no love under the definite eyes of glass. 

Love remains in the flesh torn by the thirst, 
in the tiny hut that fights against the flood; 

the love is in the ditches where fight the snakes of the hunger, 
in the sad sea which rocks the corpses of the seagulls 

and in the very dark sharp kiss under the pillows. 
But the elder of the translucent hands 

will say: love, love, love, 
praised by millions of dying men; 

he will say: love, love, love, 
among the tissue trembling of tenderness; 

he will say: peace, peace, peace, 
among the shiver of knives and melons of dynamite; 

he will say: love, love, love, 
until his lips are covered with silver. 

 
In the meantime, in the meantime ¡ oh! in the meantime, 

the Negroes who remove the cuspidors, 
the boys who tremble under the pale terror of the directors, 

the women drowned in mineral oils, 
the crowd of hammer, of violin or of cloud, 

ought to shout like although they crash the brains against the 
wall, 

should shout against the domes, 
should shout mad of fire, 

ignora que Cristo puede dar agua todavía, 
ignora que la moneda quema el beso de prodigio 
y da la sangre del cordero al pico idiota del faisán. 

 
Los maestros enseñan a los niños 

una luz maravillosa que viene del monte; 
pero lo que llega es una reunión de cloacas 
donde gritan las oscuras ninfas del cólera. 

Los maestros señalan con devoción las enormes cúpulas 
sahumadas; 

pero debajo de las estatuas no hay amor, 
no hay amor bajo los ojos de cristal definitivo. 

El amor está en las carnes desgarradas por la sed, 
en la choza diminuta que lucha con la inundación; 

el amor está en los fosos donde luchan las sierpes del 
hambre, 

en el triste mar que mece los cadáveres de las gaviotas 
y en el oscurísimo beso punzante debajo de las 

almohadas. 
Pero el viejo de las manos traslúcidas 

dirá: amor, amor, amor, 
aclamado por millones de moribundos; 

dirá: amor, amor, amor, 
entre el tisú estremecido de ternura; 

dirá : paz, paz, paz, 
entre el tirite de cuchillos y melones de dinamita; 

dirá: amor, amor, amor, 
hasta que se le pongan de plata los labios. 

 
Mientras tanto, mientras tanto ¡ ay! mientras tanto, 

los negros que sacan las escupideras, 
los muchachos que tiemblan bajo el terror pálido de los 

directores, 
las mujeres ahogadas en aceites minerales, 

la muchedumbre de martillo, de violín o de nube, 
ha de gritar aunque le estrellen los sesos en el muro, 

ha de gritar frente a las cúpulas, 
ha de gritar loca de fuego, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            517      

 

  

should shout mad of snow, 
has to  shout with the head full of excrement, 

should shout with hoarse ,harsh-like voice 
till the cities tremble like the girls 

and they break the prisons of oil and the music, 
because we want our daily bread, 

flower of smooth and perennial tenderness shelled, 
because we want the will of the Land 
to comply which gives its fruits to all. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

ha de gritar loca de nieve, 
ha de gritar con la cabeza llena de excremento, 

ha de gritar como todas las noches juntas, 
ha de gritar con voz tan desgarrada 

hasta que las ciudades tiemblen como niñas 
y rompan las prisiones del aceite y la música, 
porque queremos el pan nuestro de cada día, 
flor de aliso y perenne ternura desgranada, 

porque queremos que se cumpla la voluntad de la Tierra 
que da sus frutos para todos. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            518      

 

  

[Index] 

Dionisio Ridruejo (1912 – 1975) 
 

 
He was born in Burgo de Osma, Soria, in 1912. He belonged to a extreme right wing 

party  called “Falange” in his youth. In 1942, he resigned to all his charges and since  1951, 
he opposed to the dictatorship of Franco’s regime. His poetry thematic is a varied one: love, 
landscape, policy, friendship, religion, death... His poetry is sober and restrained . Works: 
Plural, 1935; Sonnets to the stone, 1943 and Elegies, 1948. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Burgo de Osma, Soria, en 1912. Fue falangista en su juventud. En 1942, 
renunció a todos sus cargos y desde 1951, pasó a la oposición al régimen de la dictadura 
franquista. Su temática es muy variada: amor, paisaje, política, amistad, religiosidad, muerte... 
Su poesía es sobria y contenida. Obras: Plural, 1935; Sonetos a la piedra, 1943 y  Elegías, 
1948. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            519      

 

  

[Index] 
 

FACING THE MOTHER 
 OF A DEAD COMRADE 

 

ANTE LA MADRE DE  
UN CAMARADA MUERTO 

 (from 'The return') 
 

I come without him; but its noble load 
you put on my shoulders 

now that anoints your weak mildness 
the unmentionable reproach. 

 
I look at it with your eyes.  Yes, I see him; 

he was the purest one, himself  alone; 
he was so boyish as you carry him 

again in the bowels. 
 

I come without him.  And maternal, simple, 
generous, you seek him 

with the blind distressed hope 
on my thought. 

 
The wealth    which I am covered disturbs me sadly: 

Him nourishing my force and your blood  dying in my word. 
 

His death are my lips: I am his sweet, serene, brave death. 
And his life also, that rope that receives 

the doubt in your smile. 
 

Forgive me if I live, it raises my bent firmness 
while it fills spoils of its veins 

a sky resigned. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 (De ‘El regreso’ ) 
 

Vengo sin él; pero su noble carga 
pones sobre mis hombros 

ahora que unge tu débil mansedumbre 
el reproche indecible. 

 
Lo miro con tus ojos . Sí, lo veo; 

era el más puro, el solo; 
era tan niño como tú lo llevas 

de nuevo en las entrañas . 
 

Vengo sin él. Y maternal, sencilla, 
generosa, lo buscas 

con la ciega esperanza acongojada 
sobre mi pensamiento. 

 
Me turba tristemente la riqueza 

de que estoy revestido: 
Él nutriendo mi fuerza y moribunda 

tu sangre en mi palabra. 
 

Su muerte son mis labios: soy su muerte 
brava, serena, dulce. 

Y su vida también, esa soga que acoge 
la duda en tu sonrisa. 

 
Perdóname si vivo, si se yergue 

mi entereza doblada 
mientras llena el despojo de sus venas 

un cielo resignado. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            520      

 

  

[Index] 

Gerardo Diego (1896 – 1987) 
 

 
 

He was born in Santander in 1896. He studied Philosophy and Humanities at the 
universities of Deusto, Salamanca and Madrid. In the latter he got a doctor degree. In 1920 he 
won the chair of Literature at the High School of Soria. For his book Human verses, he was 
awarded with the National Prize of Literature ex-aequo   with Alberti in 1925. He spent the 
first year of the Civil Spanish War in France and then he returned to Spain in 1937. He was 
professor in the Secondary High School Beatriz Galindo in Madrid, till his retirement in 1939. 
He became member of the Royal Academy of Lenguage and he was awarded with the 
Cervantes Prize in  1979, together with J. L. Borges. He died in Madrid in 1987. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Santander,  en 1896. .Estudió Filosofía y Letras En Deusto, Salamanca y 
Madrid, donde se doctoró. En 1920 obtuvo la cátedra de Literatura en el Instituto de Soria. 
Por su libro Versos humanos, recibió el Premio Nacional de Literatura , junto a Alberti, en 
1925. Pasó el primer año de la Guerra Civil en Francia, regresando en 1937. Fue catedrático 
del Instituto Beatriz Galindo en Madrid, desde 1939 hasta su jubilación. Fue miembro de la 
real Academia y recibió el Premio Cervantes 1979, junto con J.L. Borges. Murió en Madrid 
en 1987. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            521      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Emigrant 

 

Emigrante 
 

The wind returns always 
although each time brings a different colour 

 
And the children of the place 

dance around the new comets 
Sings comet sings 

with the open wings 
and launch yourself  to fly 

but never forget you of your tresses. 
 

The comets passed 
but their shadows remain hanging of the doors 

and the trace they left 
fertilizes the gardens. 

 
By the furrows of the sea 

neither a single seed to stops sprouting. 
Flattened by the winds and the ships 

the foam rebloom every year. 
 

But I rather love 
the mounts that guide on its agile backs 

the stars expelled of the harem. 
 

Marine shepherd 
who without reins neither flanges 

guide the waves to its destiny. 
Do not leave me seated on the road. 

 
The wind returns always. 

The comets also 
Drops of blood from their trenzas rains 

and I get on the train. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
El viento vuelve siempre 

aunque cada vez traiga un color diferente 
 

Y los niños del lugar 
danzan alrededor de las nuevas cometas 

Canta cometa canta 
con las alas abiertas 

y lánzate a volar 
pero nunca te olvides de tus trenzas. 

 
Las cometas pasaron 

pero sus sombras quedan colgadas de las puertas 
y el rastro que dejaron 

fertiliza las huertas. 
 

Por los surcos del mar 
ni una sola semilla deja de brotar. 

Chafadas por los vientos y los barcos 
las espumas reflorecen todos los años. 

 
Pero yo amo más bien 

los montes que conducen sobre sus lomos ágiles 
las estrellas expulsadas del harem 

 
Pastor marino 

que sin riendas ni bridas 
guía las olas a su destino 

No me dejes sentado en el camino. 
 

El viento vuelve siempre. 
Las cometas también 

Gotas de sangre de sus trenzas llueven 
y yo monto el tren. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            522      

 

  

[Index] 

León Felipe (1884 -  1968) 
 

 
 

He was born in Tábara, (Zamora) in 1884. He moved with his family to Santander 
where he studied the High school. In Madrid he studied Pharmacy and he discovered his 
poetic vocation and the theatre world. He became an actor within a travelling theatre. He lived 
in Africa, Mexico and the United States. In New York, he set up friendship with Federico Gª. 
Lorca, and was professor of Spanish language in several American universities. When the 
civil war blow   he returned to Spain but in 1938 he went into exile in Paris and Mexico. He 
died in Mexico in 1968. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Tábara, (Zamora) en 1884. Se trasladó con su familia a Santander donde 
estudió el bachillerato. En Madrid estudió Farmacia  y descubrió su vocación poética y el 
mundo del teatro. Fue actor en un teatro ambulante. Residió en África, México y Estados 
Unidos. En Nueva York, entabló amistad con Federico G. Lorca .y fue profesor de español en 
universidades americanas. Al comenzar la guerra civil volvió a España pero en 1938 se exilió 
en París y México.. Murió en México en 1968. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            523      

 

  

[Index] 
 

A sign...¡ I want a sign! 

 

Un signo... ¡quiero un signo! 

I 
Don't tell me more tales 

 
Already all have been told. 

All have been said and have been written. 
And all  have been wound and filed. 

 
The old patriarch has counted them, 

they have been  counted by the chorus and the nursemaid, 
an idiot has told  them, full of harsh noise  and fury, 

they have been engraved on the window and in the wheel 
and they have been kept in s headquarters.  strong boxes. 

 
There are exact replicas of tragedies, 

phonographic disks of all the psalmodies, 
and photographic plates of all shipwrecks. 

No story has been lost.  Be calm. 
It is known that the poem is a chronicle, 

that the chronicle is a myth, 
the History a snake that bites the fable 

and the domestic poet is  the columnist of the King, and the 
Archbishop: 

The narrator of stories. 
 

All have registered. 
And they all are  a still alive.  There it passes the town crier: 

"¡ Stories! ...¡ Stories! ...¡ Stories! ...” 
It is that old narrator of shadows and of slaughters 

who now announces tales. 
But I do not want tales. 

Don’t tell me  more tales. 
 

II 
 

I know all the stories 
 

I 

No me contéis más cuentos 
 

Ya se han contado todos. 
Todos se han dicho y se han escrito. 
Y todos se han ovillado y archivado. 

 
Los ha contado el viejo patriarca, 

los han contado el coro y la nodriza, 
los ha dicho un idiota, lleno de estrépito y de furia, 

se han grabado en la ventana y en la rueda 
y se han guardado en cajas fuertes de matrices. 

 
Hay réplicas exactas de tragedias, 

discos fonográficos de todas las salmodias, 
y placas fotográficas de todos los naufragios. 

Ningún cuento se ha perdido. Estad tranquilos. 
Se sabe que el poema es una crónica, 

que la crónica es un mito, 
la Historia una serpiente que se muerde la fábula 

y el poeta doméstico el cronista del Rey, y el Arzobispo: 
el narrador de cuentos. 

 

Todos se han registrado. 
Y todos están vivos todavía. Ahí pasa el pregonero: 

“ ¡ Cuentos!...¡ Cuentos!...¡ Cuentos!...” 
Es aquel viejo narrador de sombras y de risas 

que ahora pregona cuentos. 
Pero yo no quiero cuentos... 
No me contéis más cuentos. 

 

II 
 

Sé todos los cuentos 
 

Yo no sé muchas cosas, es verdad. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            524      

 

  

I do not know many things, it’s true. 
I say only what I have seen. 

And I have seen: 
that the cradle of the man is rocked by tales... 

That the shouts of anguish of the man are drowned by tales.. 
That the cry of the man is locked with tales. 

That the bones of the man are buried with stories... 
And that the fear of the man 
has invented all the tales . 

I know very few things, it’s true. 
But they have rocked  me with all the tales. 

And I know all the tales. 

 
 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Digo tan sólo lo que he visto. 
Y he visto: 

que la cuna del hombre la mecen con cuentos... 
Que los gritos de angustia del hombre los ahogan con 

cuentos... 
Que el llanto del hombre los taponan con cuentos... 

Que los huesos del hombre los entierran con cuentos... 
Y  que el miedo del hombre... 

ha inventado todos los cuentos. 
Yo sé muy pocas cosas, es verdad. 

Pero me han dormido con todos los cuentos... 
Y sé todos los cuentos. 

 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            525      

 

  

[Index] 

Gabriel Celaya (1911 - 1991) 
 

 
 

He was born in Hernani, (Guipúzcoa). His real name was Rafael Mújica Celaya. He 
studied in Madrid Engineering an he lived in the Residence of Students, close to Garcia Lorca. 
In 1935 he published Tide of silence. In 1968 he was awarded with  the Taormina prize in 
Italy. During a long period of time  he became  the leader of the "social poetry", with books as 
The cards put on the table (Las cartas boca arriba) (1951), Iberic Songs (1955), National 
Episodes (1962). He died in Madrid in 1991. 
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Hernani, (Guipúzcoa ). Su verdadero nombre es Rafael Mújica Celaya. 
Estudió en Madrid la carrera de Ingeniero, vivió en le Residencia de Estudiantes, junto a 
García Lorca. En 1935 publicó Marea del silencio. En 1968 recibe el premio Taormina en 
Italia. Durante una larga etapa se convertirá en el adalid de la “poesía social”, con libros como 
Las cartas boca arriba ( 1951), Cantos iberos ( 1955),Episodios nacionales ( 1962). Muere 
en Madrid en 1991. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            526      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Poetry is a weapon 
Loaded of future 

 

La poesía es un arma 
Cargada de futuro 

 
When one expects nothing personally exciting, 

but palpitates and continues closer to the conscience, 
wildly existing, blindly affirming, 
like a pulse that strikes the dark, 

 
When one looks facing the giddy clear eyes of the death, 

one utters truth. 
The barbarians, terrible, loving cruelties. 

 
The poems are recited 

which widen the lungs of as many as, suffocated, 
ask to be, ask rhythm, 

ask law for that they  feel excessive, 
 

With the velocity of instinct, 
with the ray of prodigy, 
like magic evidence, 

the real becomes as identical  to itself. 
 

Poetry for the poor, necessary poetry 
like the bread of each day, 

as the air we demand three times per minute, 
to be and meanwhile we are to give a Yes that glorifies. 

 
Because we live like blows, because they  barely 

leave us to say that we are who we are, 
our songs cannot be without sin a decoration. 

We are touching the bottom. 
 

I curse  Poetry conceived as a cultural luxury 
by the neutral who , being washing their hands, they ignore 

and they evade. 
I curse the poetry of whom does not take party till being 

 
Cuando ya nada se espera personalmente exaltante, 
mas se palpita y se sigue más acá de la conciencia, 

fieramente existiendo, ciegamente afirmando, 
como un pulso que golpea las tinieblas, 

 
cuando se miran de frente los vertiginosos ojos claros de 

la muerte, 
se dicen las verdades: 

las bárbaras, terribles, amorosas crueldades. 
 

Se dicen los poemas 
que ensanchan los pulmones de cuantos, asfixiados, 

piden ser, piden ritmo, 
piden ley para aquello que sienten excesivo, 

 
con la velocidad del instinto, 

con el rayo del prodigio, 
como mágica evidencia, lo real se nos convierte 

en lo idéntico a sí mismo. 
 

Poesía para el pobre, poesía necesaria 
como el pan de cada día, 

como el aire que exigimos tres veces por minuto, 
para ser y en tanto somos dar un sí que glorifica. 

 
Porque vivimos a golpes, porque apenas si nos dejan 

decir que somos quien somos , 
nuestros cantares no pueden ser sin pecado un adorno. 

Estamos tocando el fondo. 
 

Maldigo la poesía concebida como un lujo 
cultural por los neutrales 

que, lavándose las manos, se desentienden y evaden. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            527      

 

  

stained. 
 

I do mine the lacks.  I feel in me  all who suffer 
and I sing breathing. 

I sing and  sing, beyond my personal grief, I get wide. 
 

I wanted to give you life, to provoke new acts, 
and I calculate therefore with technique, what I can be able. 

I feel an engineer of the verse and a worker 
who  manages to work with others for Spain in its steels. 

 
Such is my poetry: poetry – both tool 
and beat of the unanimous and blind. 

Perhaps it is, a weapon loaded of an expansive future 
targeted at your chest 

 
It’s not a poetry drop by drop thought. 

It’s not a beautiful product.  It’s not a perfect fruit. 
It is something as the air we all breathe 

and it’s  the song which widens what we carry inside. 
 

They are words that we all repeat feeling them 
as ours, and they fly.  They are more than the well-known 

thing. 
They are the  more necessary: what has a name. 

They are shouts in the sky, and on  land, they are acts. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Maldigo la poesía de quien no toma partido hasta 
mancharse. 

 
Hago mías las faltas. Siento en mí a cuantos sufren 

y canto respirando. 
Canto y canto, y cantando más allá de mis penas 

personales, me ensancho. 
 

Quisiera daros vida, provocar nuevos actos, 
y calculo por eso con con técnica, qué puedo. 
Me siento un ingeniero del verso y un obrero 

que trabaja con otros a España en sus aceros. 
 

Tal es mi poesía : poesía – herramienta 
a la vez que latido de lo unánime y ciego. 

Tal vez es, arma cargada de futuro expansivo 
con que te apunto al pecho. 

 
No es una poesía gota a gota pensada. 

No es un bello producto. No es un fruto perfecto. 
Es algo como el aire que todos respiramos 

Y es el canto que espacia cuanto dentro llevamos. 
 

Son palabras que todos repetimos sintiendo 
como nuestras,  y vuelan. Son más que lo mentado. 

Son lo más necesario: lo que tiene nombre. 
Son gritos en el cielo, y en la tierra, son actos. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            528      

 

  

[Index] 

Leopoldo Lugones (1874 – 1938) 
 

 
 

He was born in Río Seco, Cordova, Argentina in 1874. In 1896 he moved to Buenos 
Aires and he entered the Ministry of Education. In Paris together with Rubén Darío and 
Jaimes Freyre, he founded the Revue Sudamericaine. He is the new master of the new 
Argentinean lyrics. His style is a  vital, sensitive and sonorous. Modernism: in his work 
Twilights of garden 1905, he goes through into a more a subtle lyric: Lunario Sentimental 
1909. He ends by becoming a singer of his town in a work of auchthoctonous accents: 
Romances of Rio Seco - 1938. He committed suicide in Buenos Aires in 1938 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Río Seco, Córdoba Argentina en 1874. En 1896 se trasladó a Buenos Aires e 
ingresó en el Ministerio de Educación. En París junto a Rubén Darío y Jaimes Freyre , fundó 
la Revue Sudamericaine.  Es el nuevo maestro de la nueva lírica argentina. De un 
Modernismo vitalista, sensorial y sonoro : Crepúsculos del jardín 1905, pasa a una lírica más 
sutil: Lunario sentimental- 1909. Acaba por convertirse en cantor  de su pueblo en  una obra 
de acentos criollos: Romances de Río Seco – 1938. Se suicidó en Buenos Aires en 1938 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            529      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Of the cattle and the cornfields. 
[Fragment] 

 

A los ganados y las mieses. 
[Fragmento] 

 
As it was festival the national day 

and in my mountains all mornings of May 
are cloudy the twenty-fifth 

our mother early left 
for a walk in the country with us, 
to look for the most hidden scrub 

the wild honeycomb which already the autumn 
sweetened in precious maturity. 
A serious and tidy blonde man 

made her pacific lady tresses look beautiful. 
And ahead, in playful gang, 

we ran  with the dog 
that described in circular movements  crazy trails. 

With exact certainty the man said: 
"Here it is the camuatí, misia Custodia", 
that thus its pious and maternal name 

as natural attribute it embellishes. 
Although here it goes  along with the country 

every light, for sure it doesn’t disturb 
Slimed  by arduous years, 

like glass, almost with no shadow. 
Later she has become very old, 

and if she dies it would be a  sad thing 
that her son wouldn’t have honored her 

as she deserved it by rhetorical vanity. [...] 
Of water, from  silence and sun is composed 

the placid beauty of the hour. 
It smells the weak sauzal as new varnish, 

blonde of light slimmed and notorious. 
Very far away, on the top of some tree, 

a magpie greets with the queue. 
And while he was telling us all this 

the good and jovial father gave us escort. 

 
Como era fiesta el día de la patria , 
y en mi sierra se nublan casi todas 

las mañanas de mayo, el veinticinco 
nuestra madre salía a buena hora 

de paseo campestre con nosotros , 
a buscar por las breñas más recónditas 

el panal montaraz que ya el otoño 
azucaraba en madurez preciosa . 

Embellecía un rubio aseado y grave 
sus pacíficas trenzas de señora . 

Y adelante, en pandilla juguetona , 
corríamos nosotros con el perro 

que describía en arco pistas locas . 
Con certeza cabal decía el hombre: 

“Aquí está el camuatí, misia Custodia”, 
que así su nombre maternal y pío 
como atributo natural la adorna. 

Aunque aquí vaya junto con la patria 
toda luz , es seguro que no estorba. 

Adelgazada por penosos años , 
como el cristal, casi no tiene sombra. 

Después se nos ha puesto  muy anciana, 
y si muere sería triste cosa 

que no la hubiese honrado como debe 
su hijo mayor por vanidad retórica.[...] 

De agua , silencio y sol está compuesta 
la plácida belleza de la hora. 

huele el sauzal endeble a barniz nuevo, 
rubio de luz escuálida y notoria. 

Muy lejos , en la punta de algún árbol, 
una urraca saluda con la cola. 

Y mientras nos contaba  todo aquello 
el buen padre jovial nos daba escolta. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            530      

 

  

They got in front the younger 
who asked to gallop, he kept beast short 

rein maintained parallel to the path where all 
the family returned 

at the same pace and in the same way. 
Only the dog, near the stirrup, 

head down went longing downcast now. 
Thus in deep intimacy of infancy, 
the national day in my memory, 

he lives in that sweetness incorporated 
as the perfume to the sediment of the flask. 

Happy who as I has drunk country, 
in the honey of its forest and of its rock! 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Montado por delante el más chiquillo 
que pedía galope , a rienda corta 

el andar de la bestia mantenía 
paralelo a la senda donde toda 
la familia marchaba de regreso 

al mismo paso y en la misma forma . 
Sólo el perro, a la vera del estribo, 

iba anhelando cabizbajo ahora. 
Así en profunda intimidad de infancia, 

el día de la patria en mi memoria, 
vive a aquella dulzura incorporado 

como el perfume a la hez de la redoma. 
¡ Feliz quien como yo ha bebido patria , 

en la miel de su selva y de su roca! 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            531      

 

  

[Index] 

José Santos Chocano (1875 – 1934) 
 

 
 

He was born in Lima, Peru in 1875. His romantic character caused him a shaken life. 
He participated actively in politics being imprisoned when he was 20 years for revelry. He 
performed diplomatic charges in Colombia and Spain, and he was an advisor of Pancho Villa. 
He was murdered in a tramway in Chile. He left aside  in a certain way the Modernism, when 
he centred on the landscape, the men, the legend and the history of his town. His most famous 
work is: Soul of America 1906 and, within it the poem with most significant title is: Three 
notes of the indigenous soul. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Lima, Perú en 1875. Su temperamento romántico hizo que su vida fuese muy 
agitada. Partició activamente en política, siendo encarcelado a los 20 años por subversivo. 
Desempeño cargos diplomáticos en Colombia y España., y fue consejero de Pancho Villa.Fue 
asesinado en un tranvía en Chile. Se sale en cierto modo del Modernismo, al centrarse en el 
paisaje, los hombres, las leyendas y la historia de su pueblo. Su obra más famosa es : Alma de 
América 1906 y, dentro de ella el poema que lleva el significativo título de:  Tres notas del 
alma indígena. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            532      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Who knows! 

 

¡Quién sabe¡ 

 
Indian who appears at the door 

of that your rustic mansion: 
For my thirst haven’t you any water?, 

for my cold any blanket?, 
Scarce  corn  for my hunger?, 
for my dream a badly corner?, 

brief stillness for my adventure? ... 
Who knows, Mister! 

Indian who works with fatigue 
lands which belong to another owner they are: 

do you  ignore that you owe them 
because of  your blood and your sweat?, 

do you ignore that audacious greed, 
centuries behind removed them from you?, 

Do you ignore that you are the master? 
Who knows, Mister! 

Indian of taciturn forehead 
and no shiny pupil: 

What thought is that  one you hide 
in your enigmatic expression?, 
what do you  seek in your life?, 

what do you implore to your God?, 
what does your silence dream ? 

Who knows, Mister! 
Oh, mysterious and old race, 

of inscrutable  heart, 
which without enjoying you may see the happiness 

and without suffering one may see the pain: 
You are Augustus like the Ande; 
the Large Ocean and the Sun! 

Your gesture which looks 
of despicable resignation, 
it’s of a wise indifference 

and of a pride without grudge... 

 
Indio que asomas a la puerta 

de esa tu rústica mansión: 
¿para mi sed no tienes agua?, 

¿para mi frío cobertor?, 
¿parco maíz par mi hambre?, 
¿para mi sueño mal rincón?, 

¿breve quietud para mi andanza?... 
¡Quién sabe, señor! 

Indio que labras con fatiga 
tierras que de otro dueño son: 
¿ignoras tú  que deben tuyas 
ser, por tu sangre y tu sudor?, 
¿ignoras tú que audaz codicia, 

siglos atrás te las quitó?, 
¿ignoras tú que eres el amo? 

¡Quién sabe, señor! 
Indio de frente taciturna 
y de pupilas sin fulgor: 

¿qué pensamiento es el que escondes 
en tu enigmática expresión?, 

¿qué es lo que buscas en tu vida?, 
¿qué es lo que imploras a tu dios?, 
¿qué es lo que sueña tu silencio? 

¡Quién sabe, señor! 
¡Oh, raza antigua y misteriosa, 

de impenetrable corazón, 
que sin gozar ves la alegría 

y sin sufrir ves el dolor: 
eres augusta como el Ande, 
el Grande Océano y el Sol! 

ese tu gesto que parece 
como de vil resignación, 

es de una sabia indiferencia 
y de un orgullo sin rencor... 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            533      

 

  

It runs into my veins your blood, 
and, for such blood, if my God 

asked me what do I prefer, 
if  cross or laurel, thorn or flower, 

a kiss which puts out my sighs or gall which fulfils my song, 
I would answer hesitating: 

Who knows, Sir! 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Corre en mis venas sangre tuya, 
y, por tal sangre, si mi Dios 
me interrogase qué prefiero, 
cruz o laurel, espina o flor, 

beso que apague mis suspiros 
o hiel que colme mi canción, 

responderíale dudando: 
 ¡Quién sabe , señor! 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            534      

 

  

[Index] 

Julio Herrera y Reissig (1875 – 1910) 
 

 
 

He was born in Montevideo (Uruguay), within a cultivated but ruined family. He was 
affected by a cardiac disease so  he always remained in Montevideo. At first romantic, he 
soon derived towards a poetry influenced by Rubén Darío and Leopoldo Lugones. He 
published Wagnerians in 1900, The Ecstasies of the mountain, and The abandoned parks in 
1908. He died in Montevideo in 1910 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Montevideo (Uruguay), perteneciente a una familia ilustre venida a menos. 
Afectado por una lesión cardíaca permaneció siempre en Montevideo. Inicialmente 
romántico, derivó pronto hacia una poesía influenciada por Rubén Darío y Leopoldo Lugones. 
Publicó  Wagnerianas en 1900, Los Éxtasis de la montaña, y Los parques abandonados, 
1908. Murió en Montevideo en 1910. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            535      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The return to the fields 

 

La vuelta a los campos 

 
The afternoon pays in divine gold the tasks... 

One can see clean women dressed up in percale, 
braiding their hairs with lime trees and lilies 
or doing their knitting across the thresholds. 

Shoes nailed and sticks and shawls... 
Two girls with their pitchers barely. 

Slide. It flees the flight sleepwalker of the serene hours. 
A sigh of Arcady combs the thickets... 

An austere silence falls...  Off the puddle 
it  explodes a nasal ballad of marimba. 

The lakes are cushioned with spectral lampos, 
the already chimerical summits are crowned of roses. 

and in the distance they smoke the  dusty routes 
where the labourers return to the fields. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
La tarde paga en oro divino las faenas... 

Se ven limpias mujeres vestidas de percales., 
trenzando sus cabellos con tilos y azucenas 

o haciendo sus labores de aguja en los umbrales. 
Zapatos claveteados y báculos y chales... 

Dos mozas con sus cántaros se deslizan apenas. 
Huye el vuelo sonámbulo de las horas serenas . 

Un suspiro de arcadia peina los matorrales... 
Cae un silencio austero... Del charco que se nimba 

estalla una gangosa balada de marimba. 
Los lagos se amortiguan con espectrales lampos , 
las cumbres ya quiméricas corónanse de rosas ... 

y humean a lo lejos las rutas polvorosas 
por donde los labriegos regresan a los campos. 

 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            536      

 

  

[Index] 

Celso Emilio Ferreiro (1912 – 1979) 
 

 
 

He was born in Celanova, (Ourense), in 1912, within a home with a “galleguista” 
atmosphere. In 1934 he founded the Federation of young galleguistas. He studied Law and 
Teaching. In 1938, when the heat of Spanish Civil war he wrote Longa noite of pedra. (Long 
night of stone). He is one of the most powerful and exciting voices of the poetry of the 
contemporary Galicia. His poetry is the chronicle  of a difficult time, full of hope. Works: 
Long night of stone, 1962, Trip to the country of the dwarves, 1968, Where the world is called 
Celanova, 1975. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Celanova, (Ourense), en 1912, en un hogar de ambiente galeguista. En 1934 
fundó la Federación de las juventudes galeguistas. Estudió Derecho y Magisterio .En 1938, en 
plena guerra Civil, escribió Longa noite de pedra. (Larga noche de piedra). Es una de las 
voces más poderosas y emocionantes de la poesía de la Galicia contemporánea.. Su poesía es 
crónica de un tiempo difícil, lleno de esperanza, Obras: Larga noche de piedra, 1962, Viaje al 
país de los enanos, ¡968, Donde el mundo se llama Celanova, 1975. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            537      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Long night of stone 

 

Larga noche de piedra 

 
The roof is made of stone. 
The walls and darkness 

are made of stone. 
The floor and the grilles 

are made of stone. 
The doors, 
the chains, 

the air, 
the windows, 

the glance 
are made of stone. 

The men hearts 
which threaten far away 
are also made of stone. 

And I, dying 
in this long night 

of stone. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
El techo es de piedra. 

De piedra son los muros 
y las tinieblas. 

De piedra el suelo 
y las rejas. 

Las puertas, 
las cadenas, 

el aire, 
las ventanas, 
las miradas, 

son de piedra. 
Los corazones de los hombres 

que a lo lejos acechan, 
hechos están 

también 
de piedra. 

Y yo, muriendo 
en esta larga noche 

de piedra. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            538      

 

  

[Index] 

Rosalía de Castro (1837 – 1885) 
 

 
 

She was born in Santiago de Compostela in 1837. She began to write at an early age. 
She moved to Madrid in 1856 and two years later she married with the historian Manuel 
Murguía. Her first poetry book was, Flower, (1857). She moved to Galicia, her native land 
and there she would write most of her literary work: New leaves (Follas Novas) and Galician 
Song written in Galician language. Her work is soaked up of a great melancholy and set down 
love by the beauty of the inland. Azorín says that her work has emotion and tenderness. She 
died in Padrón in  1885. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Santiago de Compostela en 1837. Comenzó a escribir tempranamente. Se 
trasladó a Madrid en 1856 y dos años más tarde se casó con el historiador Manuel Murguía.. 
Su primer libro de poesías, Flor, (1857). Se traslada a Galicia, su tierra natal y allí escribirá la 
mayor parte de su obra: Follas Novas y Cantares gallegos escritas en lengua gallega. Su obra 
está impregnada de una gran melancolía y pone de manifiesto el amor por  la belleza de su 
tierra. Azorín dice que su obra tiene emoción y ternura.. Muere en Padrón, en 1885. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            539      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The widows of the living 
And the widows of the dead 

 

Las viudas de los vivos y las 
Viudas de los muertos 

 
The  oxen were sold, 

there were sold the  cows, 
the pot 

and the blanket of the bed. 
It was  sold the chart 

and the lands he had , 
he was only left 

dressed with clothes. 
"María, I am a boy 

and I’m not allow to beg, 
I go round the world 
to see if I can win. 

Galicia is poor, 
and the  Havana I go... 

Good-bye, good-bye tokens 
of my heart!" 

“¡Go ahead companions, 
all the earth belongs to mankind! 

He who haven’t see anything but his own, 
the ignorance consumes him. 

Raise your spirit!  He whom changes clothes ,God helps him 
!And although now we set off Galicia far away, 

you will see when we come back 
how the oak treeshave grown! 

Tomorrow is the big day, ¡to the sea, friends! 
Tomorrow, God receives us!" 

In the appearance the happiness, 
in the heart the effort, and 

the harmonious bell of hope, 
far away, ringing the bell for Dead! 
This goes and that goes and all go; 

Galicia without men you remain 
who works for you. 

 
Le vendieron los bueyes, 
le vendieron las vacas, 

el pote del caldo 
y la manta de la cama. 
Le vendieron el carro 
y las tierras que tenía, 

lo dejaron sólo 
con la ropa vestida. 
“ María, soy mozo 

pedir no me es dado, 
yo voy por el mundo 
por ver de ganarlo. 
Galicia está pobre, 

a la Habana me voy... 
¡Adiós, adiós prendas 

de mi corazón!” 
“ ¡Animo, compañeros, 

toda la tierra es de los hombres! 
Aquel que no vio nunca más que la propia, 

la ignorancia lo consume. 
¡ Ánimo! ¡A quien se muda , Dios lo ayuda! 
¡Y aunque ahora vamos de Galicia lejos, 

veréis cuando tornemos 
lo que crecieron los robles! 

Mañana es el día grande, ¡a la mar, amigos! 
¡ Mañana, Dios nos acoge!” 
En el semblante la alegría, 
en el corazón el esfuerzo, 

y la campana armoniosa de la esperanza, 
lejos, tocando a muerto! 
Este se va y aquel se va 

y todos se van; 
Galicia sin hombres quedas 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            540      

 

  

You have on the other hand orphan boys  and 
Orphan girls 

and fields of solitude, 
and mothers who do not have children 
and children who do not have parents. 

And you have hearts which suffer 
long mortal absences, 

widows of the living and dead 
whether none will be of any comfort to them. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

que te puedan trabajar. 
Tienes en cambio, huérfanos y 

Huérfanas 
y campos de soledad, 

y madres que no tienen hijos 
e hijos que no tienen padres. 

Y tienes corazones que sufren 
largas ausencias mortales, 
viudas de vivos y muertos 

que nadie consolará. 

 
 
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            541      

 

  

[Index] 

Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer (1836 – 1870) 
 

 
 

He was born in Seville in 1836. In 1854, he moved to Madrid to live Literature 
suffering deprivations. His Literature contains the deep feelings of the Romanticism: love and 
melancholy. He wrote in the newspapers of the time part of his work. It stands out its 
Leyendas and Rimas. He died in Madrid in 1870.  

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Sevilla en 1836. En 1854, marchó a Madrid para vivir la literatura , pasando 
privaciones. Su literatura contiene los sentimientos intensos del Romanticismo: el amor, la 
melancolía. Escribió en periódicos de la época , parte de sus obra.. Destacan sus Leyendas y 
Rimas. .Muere en Madrid en 1870. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            542      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Ryhmes IV 

 

Rima IV 

 
Do not you say that its treasure exhausted 
of lacking matters the lira became dump. 

Presumably it  will never be poets but always 
¡there will be poetry! 

 
While the waves from the light to the kiss 

palpitate passionately; 
while the sun looks at torn clouds 

of fire and gold; 
while the air carries 

perfumes and harmonies in its laps; 
while there is Spring in the world, 

there will be poetry! 
 

While the science won’t discover 
the sources of life, 

and in either the sea or the sky there’ll be an abyss 
that the calculation resists; 

while Mankind  always in progress 
do not know where it walks; 

while there’ll  be a mystery for a man, 
¡ there will be poetry! 

 
While he feels  that the soul laughs, 

without the lips laughing; 
while one weeps avoiding the tears 

to mar the pupil; 
while the heart and the head 

continue the battle; 
while there are hopes and memories, 

¡ there will be poetry ¡ 
 

While there’re eyes which reflect 
The eyes which look at them; 

 
No digáis que agotado su tesoro, 
de asuntos falta enmudeció la lira. 

Podrá no haber poetas; pero siempre 
¡habrá poesía! 

Mientras las ondas de la luz al beso 
palpiten encendidas; 

mientras el sol las desgarradas nubes 
de fuego y oro vista; 

mientras el aire en su regazo lleve 
perfumes y armonías; 

mientras haya en mundo primavera, 
habrá poesía! 

Mientras la ciencia a descubrir no alcance 
las fuentes de la vida, 

Y en el mar o en el cielo haya un abismo 
que el cálculo resista; 

mientras la humanidad, siempre avanzando, 
no sepa a dó camina; 

mientras haya un misterio para el hombre, 
¡ habrá poesía ! 

Mientras se sienta que se ríe el alma, 
sin que los labios rían; 

mientras se llore sin que el llanto acuda 
a nublar la pupila; 

mientras el corazón y la cabeza 
batallando prosigan; 

mientras haya esperanzas y recuerdos, 
¡ habrá poesía ¡ 

Mientras haya unos ojos que reflejen 
Los ojos que los miran; 

mientras responda el labio suspirando 
labio que suspira; 

Mientras sentirse puedan en un beso 
Dos almas confundidas; 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            543      

 

  

while the lip responds yearning 
the lip that sighs; 

While they feel each other in a  kiss 
two souls tied together; 

while there exists a beautiful woman, 
¡there will be poetry! 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

mientras exista una mujer hermosa, 
¡habrá poesía! 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            544      

 

  

[Index] 

Juan Ramón Jiménez (1881 – 1958) 
 

 
 

He was born in Moguer (Huelva) in  1881. He studied with the Jesuits in the Puerto de 
Santa Maria. In 1900 he moved to Madrid called by Rubén Darío, to fight for "the 
Modernism". He often attended the Free Education Institution. In 1905 he wrote: Silversmith 
and I (Platero y yo), a book written in poetic prose. He married to Zenobia Camprubí in 1916. 
He left Spain at the beginning of the civil war lecturing in the United States, Puerto Rico and 
Cuba. He was awarded with Prize of Literature in 1956. He died in Puerto Rico in 1958. His 
poetry summarizes the routes of the Spanish poetry from the Modernism towards new forms.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Moguer ( Huelva), en 1881. Estudió con los Jesuitas en el Puerto de Santa 
María. En 1900 marcha a Madrid , llamado por Rubén Darío, para luchar por “ el 
Modernismo”. Frecuentó la Institución  Libre de Enseñanza . En 1905, escribe: Platero y yo, 
libro escrito en prosa poética.. Se casó con Zenobia  Camprubí  en 1916. Salió de España al 
comienzo de la guerra civil, dando cursos en Estados Unidos, Puerto Rico y Cuba. Recibió el 
.Premio Nobel de Literatura en 1956. Murió en Puerto Rico en 1958. Su poesía resume los 
recorridos por la poesía española desde el Modernismo hacia nuevas formas. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            545      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Pyrenees 
(Nostalgy of Sunday) 

 

Pirineos 
(Nostalgia de domingo) 

 
When entering in Spain, the afternoon goes falling…. 

In the peaks, the sun raises eternally. 
(The world opens) and the slate roofs 
of shale remain in the French towns. 
The tower of Sallent rings far away 

(It Is Sunday) The breeze plays in the green rocks. 
The sunset is purer each time.  It smells the south more. 

It’s clearer the cornfields swinging. 
By the bloomy fields, in a peace of romance, 

the rose milky cows moo lying down. 
The speech of the shepherd touches us our  heart. 

The land goes moving away, maternal, to the death... 
Happiness, solitude, silence. The Aeschylus fill, 

the sky like stars the happy field. 
Happiness , solitude, silence. The water, in all, 

sings between the descending laugh of the bells. 
 
 

The poor boy 
 

They have put a ridiculous, 
crazy, absurd dress to the boy; 

it suits him short and long; 
shouts of colours have covered him all over. 

And the boy 
looks  and touches himself standing straight. 

All causes laughter to the monkey, 
the hands in his pockets... 

The sister says to him 
(peak of sparrow, pretty firebrands the eyes, 

hands and curls in the broken mirror) : 
“¡Son, 

you look like a wealthy boy! ” 
The sun vibrates.. 

 
Al entrar en España, va cayendo la tarde... 
En los picos, el sol se eleva eternamente. 
( El mundo se abre)Y los techos de pizarra 

se quedan en los pueblos franceses. 
La torre de Sallent repica allá en el fondo. 

( Es domingo)La brisa juega en las peñas verdes. 
El ocaso es más puro cada vez. Huele el sur 
más .Es más claro el ondear de las mieses. 
Por los prados con flor, en una paz de idilio, 

mujen, echadas, mansas vacas rosas de leche. 
El habla del zagal nos toca el corazón. 

La patria va alejando, maternal, a la muerte... 
Ventura, soledad, silencio. Las esquilas 

llenan, cual las estrellas el cielo, el campo alegre. 
Silencio, soledad, ventura. El agua, en todo, 

canta entre el descendente reír de los cascabeles 
 
 

El niño pobre 
 

Le han puesto al niño un vestido 
absurdo, loco, ridículo; 

le está largo y corto; gritos 
de colores le han prendido 
por todas partes. Y el niño 
se mira, se toca, erguido. 
Todo le hace reír al mico, 

las manos en los bolsillos ... 
La hermana le dice  (pico 

de gorrión, tizos lindos 
los ojos, manos y rizos 

en el roto espejo): 
 “¡Hijo, 

pareces un niño rico!...” 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            546      

 

  

The town  snores, asleep, in peace. 
Only the boy 

comes and goes with his dress on.. 
In the fair, they pennants are fallen. 
Pititos in hallways. When the boy 

enters the house, in a sigh 
the mother screams her: 

" ¡Son!" 
(And he looks at her in silence rocking, 

hungry and submissive, 
the feet on the chair), 

"Son, 
you look like a wealthy boy! 

 
...”  Bells.  Five o’clock... 

Lyrical sun. 
Drapery and candles. 

Fragrant wind of the river. 
The procession. 

Oh, how idyllic rumour 
of silver and glass! 

Reliquaries with the shine 
of sunset in its mystical breast!  ... 

The boy, among the uproar, 
Is touches and  looks at himself. .. 

” ¡ Son!", 
says his drunken father 

(a tear in the slime of the bright eye, 
flower of vice), 

"you look like a wealthy boy...." 
 

The afternoon  falls. 
Mallows of gold sweeten the tower. 

Whistles awaken. The Chinese lanterns, 
even the rockets with a living sun 

are rocked half lit 
By the square hands in hands 

well washed, clean suits, 

Vibra el sol. Ronca, dormido, 
el pueblo en paz. Solo el niño 
viene y va con su vestido... 

En la feria, están caídos 
los gallardetes. Pititos 

en zaguanes...Cuando el niño 
entra en casa , en un suspiro 

le chilla la madre 
:”¡Hijo!” 

(y él la mira calladito, 
meciendo, hambriento y sumiso, 

los pies en la silla), 
 “hijo, 

pareces un niño rico!...” 
 

Campanas. Las cinco..Lírico 
sol. Colgaduras y cirios. 
Viento fragante del río. 

La procesión. ¡Oh, qué idílico 
rumor de platas y vidrios! 
¡Relicarios con el brillo 

de ocaso en su seno místico! 
... El niño, entre el vocerío, 

se toca, se mira.. 
.”¡ Hijo!”, 

le dice el padre bebido 
(una lágrima en el limo 
del ojuelo, flor de vicio), 
“pareces un niño rico! ...” 

 
La tarde cae. Malvas de oro 

endulzan la torre. Pitos 
despiertos. Los farolillos, 

aun los cohetes con sol vivo, 
se mecen medio encendidos. 
Por la plaza, de las manos, 
bien lavados, trajes limpios, 
con dinero y con juguetes, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            547      

 

  

with money and with toys, 
the rich children come near. 

The boy goes close to them and, 
radiant and determined, 

he stared at their face in the face:- 
“¡Hey, I look like a wealthy boy!" 

 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

vienen ya los niños ricos. 
El niño se les arrima, 
y, radiante y decidido, 

les dice en la cara:-“¡Ea, 
yo parezco un niño rico!” 

 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            548      

 

  

[Index] 

Vicente Aleixandre y Merlo (1900 – 1981) 
 

 
 

He was born in Seville in 1900. In Madrid he studied Law and mercantile Intendance. 
In 1917 he knew Dámaso Alonso who awoke his poetic vocation. His delicate health 
prevented him to work in the railroads so he dedicated himself to the poetry. Scope (Ámbito), 
(1928), Swords like lips, (1932) and Earth Passion, (1935). He was awarded with the National 
Prize of Literature for his work: The destruction or the love, 1933. He was awarded with 
Nobel Prize of Literature in 1977. He died in Madrid in 1981.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Sevilla en 1900. En Madrid estudió Derecho e intendencia mercantil. En 
1917 conoció a Dámaso Alonso quien despertó su vocación poética. Su delicada salud le 
impidió trabajar en los ferrocarriles y se dedicó a la poesía. Ámbito, (1928), Espadas como 
labios, (1932) y Pasión de la tierra, (1935). Obtuvo el Premio Nacional de Literatura por su 
obra: La destrucción o el amor, 1933. Le fue otorgado el Premio Nóbel de Literatura en 1977. 
Murió en Madrid en 1981. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            549      

 

  

[Index] 
 

In the Public Square 

 

En la plaza 

 
Beautiful it is, beautifully humble and trustful , lively  and deep, 

to be under the sun, among the others, impelled, 
carried, conducted, mixed up, blushingly dragged along. 

It is no good 
to remain in the edge 

as the jetty or like the mollusk that wants copy and really 
imitate the rock. 

But it is pure and serene to be destroyed in the joy of flow and 
be lost, 

finding himself in the move whether  the great heart of the men 
palpitates extended. 

As he who  lives there, I ignore in what flat, 
and I have seen him going down stairs 

and going bravely towards the crowd and getting lost. 
The great mass passed by. 

But it was recognizable the tiny afflicted heart 
There, ¿ who would recognize him? 

There, with hope, with determination or with faith, with fearful 
bravery, 

with silent humility, there he also elapsed. 
It was an open public square, and there it was a smell of 

existence. 
A smell of a great discovered sun, curling the wind, 

a great wind where he passed his hands over his head; 
his big hand which brushed their joined foreheads and 

comforted them. 
And it was the move which staggers 

as an unique being I do not know if helpless, I do not know if 
powerful, 

but existing and perceptible, but of the land covered. 
There each one can be look at himself, 

can be happy and can be recognized by himself. 
When, in the warm afternoon, alone in your cabinet, 
with strange eyes and an interrogation in the mouth, 

 
Hermoso es, hermosamente humilde y confiante, vivifica- 

dor y profundo, 
sentirse bajo el sol, entre los demás, impelido, 

llevado, conducido, mezclado, ruborosamente arrastrado. 
No es bueno 

quedarse en la orilla 
como el malecón o como el molusco que quiere calca 

reamen- 
te imitar a la roca. 

Sino que es puro y sereno arrasarse en la dicha 
de fluir y perderse, 

encontrándose en el movimiento con que el gran corazón 
de 

los hombres palpita extendido. 
Como ése que vive ahí, ignoro en qué piso, 

y le he visto bajar por unas escaleras 
y adentrarse valientemente entre la multitud y perderse. 
La gran masa pasaba. Pero era reconocible el diminuto 

co- 
razón afluido. 

Allí, ¿ quién lo reconocería? Allí con esperanza, con 
resolu- 

ción o con fe, con temeroso denuedo, 
con silenciosa humildad, allí él también transcurría. 
Era una plaza abierta, y había olor de existencia. 
Un olor a gran sol descubierto, a viento rizándolo, 

un gran viento que sobre las cabezas pasaba su mano, 
su gran mano que rozaba las frentes unidas y las 

reconfortaba. 
Y era el serpear que se movía 

como un único ser, no sé si desvalido, no sé si poderoso, 
pero existente y perceptible, pero cubridor de la tierra. 

Allí cada uno puede mirarse y puede alegrarse y puede 
reconocerse. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            550      

 

  

you want to ask your image, 
do not look in the mirror, 

in an extinct dialogue in which you don’t listen to yourself. 
Come, come down slowly and look yourself among the others. 

There they are all, and you among them. 
Oh, take your clothes off, melt yourself and recognize yourself. 

[...] 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Cuando, en la tarde caldeada, solo en tu gabinete, 
con los ojos extraños y la interrogación en la boca, 

quisieras algo preguntar a tu imagen, 
no te busques en el espejo, 

en un extinto diálogo en que no te oyes. 
Baja, baja despacio y búscate entre los otros . 

Allí están todos, y tú entre ellos. 
Oh, desnúdate y fúndete, y reconócete.[ ...] 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            551      

 

  

[Index] 

Luis Cernuda (1902-1963) 
 

 
 

He was born in Seville. Partisan of the Spanish Republic, he went into exile in 1938. 
He travelled through  Great Britain and the United States and died in Mexico in 1963. His 
discontentment with the world and his revolt is due to a great extent to his homosexuality. His 
poetry has a romantic root. At his starts he touches the pure poetry, the classicism and the 
Surrealism, but from 1932 on  he initiates a personal style more and more simple. From 1936 
Cernuda gathers  his books under an unique title: The reality and the desire, which he 
broadens until its definitive version in 1964. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nace en Sevilla. Partidario de la República, se exilia en 1938. Viaja por G.Bretaña y 
Estados Unidos y muere en México, en 1963. Su descontento con el mundo y su rebeldía se 
deben, en gran medida, a su condición de homosexual. Su poesía es de raíz romántica. En sus 
inicios toca la poesía pura, el clasicismo y el Surrealismo, pero a partir de 1932 inicia un 
estilo personal, cada vez más sencillo. Desde 1936 Cernuda reúne sus libros bajo un mismo 
título: La realidad y el deseo, que se va engrosando hasta su versión definitiva, en 1964.  
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            552      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Pilgrim 

 

Peregrino 

 
Returning?  Do return the one that has, 

After long years, after a long trip, 
exhaustion of the road and greed... 
Of his land, his house, his friends, 

Of love that faithful waits for his return. 
 

But, ¿you?  Returning?  To return you do not think, 
But to continuing ahead 

Available for always, young or old, 
Without a son who looks for you like Ulysses, 

Without Itaca which awaits and without Penelope. 
 

It continues, continues ahead and do not return, 
Faithful till the end of the way  and your life, 

Do not miss an easier destiny, 
Your feet on the land never before founded 

Your eyes set against what you’ve never seen. 
 

 

Lament and hope 
 

We dreamed some, when we were children, fallen. 
In a vast hour of solitary leisure 

Under the lamp, facing the stamps of a book, 
With the revolution.  And we saw its dazzling wing 

Folding  like grains the powerful bodies. 
 

Younger then, the dream remained far away 
from a world where disorder and injustice, 

Stuffing obscurely the avid cities, 
they raised up  to the absorbed air of the fields. 

And in the revolution we thought: a sea, 
Whose blue rage could swallow such cold misery. 

 
The man is a cloud whether the dream is wind. 

 
¿Volver? Vuelva el que tenga, 

Tras largos años, tras un largo viaje, 
Cansancio del camino y la codicia 
De su tierra, su casa, sus amigos, 

Del amor que al regreso fiel le espere. 
 

Mas, ¿tú? ¿Volver? Regresar no piensas, 
Sino seguir libre adelante, 

Disponible por siempre, mozo o viejo, 
Sin hijo que te busque, como a Ulises, 
Sin Itaca que aguarde y sin Penélope. 

 
Sigue, sigue adelante y no regreses, 
Fiel hasta el fin del camino y tu vida, 

No eches de menos un destino más fácil, 
Tus pies sobre la tierra antes no hallada, 

Tus ojos frente a lo antes nunca visto. 
 
 

Lamento y esperanza 
 

Sonábamos algunos cuando niños, caídos 
En una vasta hora de ocio solitario 

Bajo la lámpara, ante las estampas de un libro, 
Con la revolución. Y vimos su ala fúlgida 

Plegar como una mies los cuerpos poderosos. 
 

Jóvenes luego, el sueño quedó lejos 
De un mundo donde desorden e injusticia, 

Hinchendo oscuramente las ávidas ciudades, 
Se alzaban hasta el aire absorto de los campos. 

Y en la revolución pensábamos: un mar, 
Cuya ira azul tragase tanta fría miseria. 

 
El hombre es una nube de la cual el sueño es viento. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            553      

 

  

Who will to separate thought from dream? 
You know it well, the ones who envy tomorrow. 
In the calm this puff of death which carries us. 

Stepping on ruins a mud with dew of blood. 
A continent of merchants and of actors, 

lying in wait for this crazy country, 
is waiting once defeated to plunge alone ahead his destiny, 

To tear off shreds of his old splendour. 
It encourages him only his own great sore story. 

 
And with pain the soul has moderated, it is invincible; 

But, like love  pain owes to be mute. 
Don’t say it suffer it with hope. 

Thus this easily deceived people will be dying before, already 
prey of death. 

And look at him yet open, everlasting rose among the seas. 
 

Translated by:  dabne

 

¿Quién podrá al pensamiento separarlo del sueño? 
Sabedlo bien vosotros, los que envidiéis mañana 
En la calma este soplo de muerte que nos lleva 

Pisando entre ruinas un fango con rocío de sangre. 
Un continente de mercaderes y de histriones, 
Al acecho de este loco país, está esperando 
Que vencido se hunda, solo ante su destino, 

Para arrancar jirones de su esplendor antiguo. 
Le alienta únicamente su propia gran historia dolorida. 

 
Y con dolor el alma se ha templado, es invencible; 

Pero, como el amor, debe el dolor ser mudo: 
No lo digáis, sufridlo con esperanza. Así este pueblo iluso 

Agonizará antes, presa ya de la muerte. 
Y vedle luego abierto, rosa eterna entre los mares. 

 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            554      

 

  

[Index] 

Rubén Darío (1867 – 1916) 
 

 
 

He was born in Nicaragua in 1867. He is considered the representative by excellence 
of modernist poetry. He published his first verses at 11 years old. He was an untiring traveller 
to America and Europe. He came to Spain and here he got in touch with Juan R. Jiménez, and 
the poets of the Generation of the 27. In Paris he led a Bohemian life, and in 1914 he moved 
to New York. He became seriously ill and he returned to his country. He died in Leon, 
Nicaragua, in 1916. Since Rubén Darío, the Hispano-American lyrical begins to shift the 
course of literature. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Nicaragua en 1867. Se considera el representante por excelencia de la poesía 
modernista. Publicó sus primeros versos a los 11 años. Fue un viajero incansable por América 
y Europa. Vino a España y aquí estableció contacto con Juan R. Jiménez, y los poetas de la 
Generación del 27. En París llevó una vida bohemia, y en 1914 se traslada a Nueva York. 
Enfermó gravemente y regresó a su país. Murió en León, Nicaragua, en 1916. A partir de 
Rubén Darío, la lírica hispanoamericana comienza a dar síntomas de un cambio de rumbo. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            555      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Salutation to optimism 

 

Salutación al optimismo 

 
Illustrious fertile races, blood of Hispania fertile, 

brotherly spirits,  luminous souls, 
¡God save you! 

 
Because the moment will arrive where new glory anthems 

should be sang tongues of glory . 
A broaden rumour fills the environments; magic waves of life 

reborn suddenly; 
absence goes back , Death deceived goes back; 

a new kingdom is announced, happy Sibyl dreams 
and in Pandora box , misfortunes drawn we find suddenly, 

talismánica, pure, smiley , 
as divine Virgil will say it in his verse divine queen of light, 

¡the heavenly Hope! 
 

Pale indolence, fatal distrust to whose enthusiasm you 
condemned to tomb 

or to perpetual prison you will see when the sun rises in a 
triumph of lira, 

while two continents, fertilized with glorious bones, 
evoking the haughty shadow of the old Hercules, 
they say to the globe: the high virtue resurrects 

which made Hispanic descendents owners for centuries. 
 

You abominate the mouth which predicts eternal misfortunes, 
do abominate the eyes which see only ill-fated zodiacs, 

do abominate the hands which throw stones at well-known 
ruins, 

or those who seize the torch or the suicide dagger. 
One listens at deaf spontaneous in the entrails of the world, 
the imminence of somewhat fatal today touches the Land; 

strong heroes fall, eagles with two heads scattered, 
and something starts like a wide social cataclysm 

on the face of the earth. 

 
Ínclitas razas bérrimas, sangre de Hispania fecunda,  

espíritus fraternos, luminosas almas, ¡salve!  
 

Porque llega el momento en que habrán de cantar nuevos 
himnos  

lenguas de gloria. Un vasto rumor llena los ámbitos;  
mágicas ondas de vida van renaciendo de pronto;  
retrocede el olvido, retrocede engañada la muerte;  

se anuncia un reino nuevo, feliz sibila sueña  
y en la caja pandórica, de que tantas desgracias surgieron  

encontramos de súbito, talismánica, pura, rïente,  
cual pudiera decirla en su verso Virgilio divino,  
la divina reina de luz, ¡la celeste Esperanza! 

 
Pálidas indolencias, desconfianzas fatales que a tumba  
o a perpetuo presidio condenasteis al noble entusiasmo,  

ya veréis al salir del sol en un triunfo de liras,  
mientras dos continentes, abonados de huesos gloriosos,  
del Hércules antiguo la gran sombra soberbia evocando,  

digan al orbe: la alta virtud resucita  
que a la hispana progenie hizo dueña de siglos. 

 
Abominad la boca que predice desgracias eternas,  
abominad los ojos que ven sólo zodíacos funestos,  

abominad las manos que apedrean las ruinas ilustres,  
o que la tea empuñan o la daga suicida.  

Siéntense sordos ímpetus en las entrañas del mundo,  
la inminencia de algo fatal hoy conmueve la Tierra;  

fuertes colosos caen, se desbandan bicéfalas águilas,  
y algo se inicia como vasto social cataclismo  

sobre la faz del orbe. ¿Quién dirá que las savias dormidas  
no despiertan entonces en el tronco del roble gigante  
bajo el cual se exprimió la ubre de la loba romana?  

¿Quién será el pusilánime que al vigor español niegue 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            556      

 

  

Who will say that the asleep saps 
do not awake then in the trunk of a gigantic oak tree 
under which the roman wolf ‘s udder was squeezed? 

Who will be the pusillanimous one who denies their muscles to 
Spanish vigour muscles 

and that the Spanish soul judged blind and crippled? 
It is neither  Babylonia nor Nínive buried oversight and in dust, 
neither between mummies and stones reign that inhabits the 

grave, 
the generous nation, crowned of dry pride, 

that toward the side of the fixed dawn sets the anxious looks, 
nor the one in which lies down buried the Atlantis beyond the 

seas, 
it has its chorus of strong, vigorous and high sons. 

 
Unite,  shine, support so many dispersed vigour; 
they all form a single do of ecumenical energy. 
Blood of Hispania fertile, solid, illustrious races, 

they show the past gifts which were long ago their triumph. 
Return the old enthusiasm, return the ardent spirit 
which will water tongues of fire in that epiphany. 

Together the heads tight of lyrical laurels 
and the young heads that the High Minerva decorates, 
thus the heroic gestures of the primitive grandparents, 
of the eminent parents who opened the pristine furrow, 

they set down the agrarian puffs of spring returns 
and the love of ears which initiated the work. 

 
One continent and next renewing the old lineages, 

in united spirit, in spirit, anxieties and tongue, 
they see arriving the moment in which they should sing new 

anthems 
 

The Latin- American lineage will see the great future dawn: 
In a thunder of glorious music, millions of lips 

will greet the splendid light coming from the East, 
august East, where all changes and renews 

the eternity of God, the infinite activity. 

músculos  
y que el alma española juzgase áptera y ciega y tullida?  
No es Babilonia ni Nínive enterrada en olvido y en polvo,  
ni entre momias y piedras reina que habita el sepulcro,  

la nación generosa, coronada de orgullo inmarchito,  
que hacia el lado del alba fija las miradas ansiosas,  
ni la que tras los mares en que yace sepultada la 

Atlántida,  
tiene su coro de vástagos altos, robustos y fuertes. 

Únanse, brillen, secúndense tantos vigores dispersos;  
formen todos un solo haz de energía ecuménica.  

Sangre de Hispania fecunda, sólidas, ínclitas razas,  
muestren los dones pretéritos que fueron antaño su 

triunfo.  
Vuelva el antiguo entusiasmo, vuelva el espíritu ardiente  

que regará lenguas de fuego en esa epifanía.  
Juntas las testas ancianas ceñidas de líricos lauros  
y las cabezas jóvenes que la alta Minerva decora,  
así los manes heroicos de los primitivos abuelos,  

de los egregios padres que abrieron el surco prístino,  
sientan los soplos agrarios de primaverales retornos  
y el amor de espigas que inició la labor triptolémica. 

 
Un continente y otro renovando las viejas prosapias,  

en espíritu unidos, en espíritu y ansias y lengua,  
ven llegar el momento en que habrán de cantar nuevos 

himnos. 
 

La latina estirpe verá la gran alba futura:  
en un trueno de música gloriosa, millones de labios  
saludarán la espléndida luz que vendrá del Oriente,  
Oriente augusto, en donde todo lo cambia y renueva  

la eternidad de Dios, la actividad infinita.  
Y así sea Esperanza la visión permanente en nosotros.  
¡Ínclitas razas ubérrimas, sangre de Hispania fecunda! 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            557      

 

  

And thus be Hope the permanent vision in us. 
¡Illustrious fertile races, blood of fertile Hispania! 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            558      

 

  

[Index] 

Gabriela Mistral (1898 - 1957) 
 

 
 

A Pseudonym for Lucila Godoy Alcayata. She was born in Vicuña, Chile in 1898. She 
was a daughter of a rural teacher. She dedicated herself to education and she showed herself 
as a poet, with the sonnets of the death. She gave away teaching in 1925 after representing his 
country in the Institute of Intellectual Cooperation. She  was consul in Naples and Lisbon. 
 

She is the maximum example of the overcoming of the Modernism towards a simple 
language, sometimes tough in which the prosaic thing is mixed up with deep but elementary 
images. She sang to the mother love and her love to children, the helpless and her land. 
Tenderness -1924; Tala 1938; Poems of mothers 1950. Lagar 1954. She was awarded with 
the Nobel Prize of Literature in 1945. She died in New York in 1957. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Seudónimo de Lucila Godoy Alcayata.. Nació en Vicuña, Chile en 1898. Hija de un 
maestro rural. Se dedicó a la enseñanza y se dio a conocer en Chile, como poeta, con los 
sonetos de la muerte. Dejó la enseñanza en 1925 tras ser representante de su país en el 
Instituto de Cooperación Intelectual, fue cónsul en Nápoles y Lisboa. 
 

Es el máximo ejemplo de la superación del Modernismo  hacia un lenguaje sencillo, a 
veces duro, en el  que lo prosaico se mezcla con imágenes intensas pero elementales. Cantó el 
amor materno, y su amor a los niños, a los desvalidos, a su tierra. Ternura –1924; Tala 1938; 
Poemas de las madres 1950. Lagar 1954. Premio Nobel de Literatura en 1945. Murió en 
Nueva York en 1957. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            559      

 

  

[Index] 
 

We’ ll were going to be queens 

 

Todas íbamos a ser reinas 

 
We all were going to be queens, 

of four kingdoms on the sea: 
Rosalía with Efigenia 

and Lucila with Soledad. 
 

In the valley of Elqui, piled up 
of hundred mountains or more, 

that as gifts s or tributes 
burn in red and saffron. 

 
We said it  drunken, 

and we considered as true, 
that we All be queens 

and we would arrive at the sea. 
 

With the tresses of the seven years, 
and transparent dresses of calico, 

pursuing fugitive thrushes 
under the shade of the fig tree. 

 
Of the four kingdoms, we said, 

doubtless as the Koran, 
because they’re big and worthy 

they would reach the sea. 
 

Four husbands they would marry, 
by the time to marry, 

and they were kings and folksingers 
as David, king of Judah. 

 
 

And if our kingdoms were big 
they would have, without doubt , 

green seas, seas of algae, 

 
Todas íbamos a ser reinas, 

de cuatro reinos sobre el mar: 
Rosalía con Efigenia 
y Lucila con Soledad. 

 
En el valle de Elqui, ceñido 

de cien montañas o de más, 
que como ofrendas o tributos 

arden en rojo y azafrán. 
 

Lo decíamos embriagadas, 
y lo tuvimos por verdad, 

que seríamos todas reinas 
y llegaríamos al mar. 

 
Con las trenzas de los siete años, 

y batas claras de percal, 
persiguiendo tordos huidos 
en la sombra del higueral. 

 
De los cuatro reinos, decíamos, 

indudables como el Korán, 
que por grandes y por cabales 

alcanzarían hasta el mar. 
 

Cuatro esposos desposarían, 
por el tiempo de desposar, 
y eran reyes y cantadores 
como David, rey de Judá. 

 
Y de ser grandes nuestros reinos, 

ellos tendrían, sin faltar, 
mares verdes, mares de algas, 

y el ave loca del faisán. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            560      

 

  

and the crazy bird of the pheasant. 
 

And if you have all the fruits, 
tree of milk, tree of bread, 

the guayacán tree  we would neither cut 
nor bite the metal. 

 
We All were going to be queens, 

and truly reign; 
but none has been a queen 

neither in Arauco nor in Copán. 
 

Rosalía a marine kiss 
already married with the sea, 

and the kisser, in the Guaitecas, 
he was eaten by the storm. 

 
Soledad has  raised seven brothers 
and she left her blood in their bread, 

and her  eyes became black 
because they have never seen the sea. 

 
In the vineyards of Montegrande, 

with its pure breast for bread, 
she rocks the children of other queens 

and hers  never-never. 
 

Efigenia crossed the borders , 
and without speaking, she followed him, 

without knowing him name 
because the man and the sea are alike. 

 
And Lucila, who spoke with the river, 

the mountain and the sugarcane plantation, 
in the moons of madness 
received truly a kingdom. 

 
In the clouds she counted out ten children 

 
Y de tener todos los frutos, 

árbol de leche, árbol del pan, 
el guayacán no cortaríamos 

ni morderíamos metal. 
 

Todas íbamos a ser reinas, 
y de verídico reinar; 

pero ninguna ha sido reina 
ni en Arauco ni en Copán. 

 
Rosalía beso marino 

ya desposado con el mar, 
y al besador, en las Guaitecas, 

se lo comió la tempestad. 
 

Soledad crió siete hermanos 
y su sangre dejó en su pan, 
y sus ojos quedaron negros 

de no haber visto nunca el mar. 
 

En las viñas de Montegrande, 
con su puro seno candeal, 

mece los hijos de otras reinas 
y los suyos nunca-jamás. 

 
Efigenia cruzó extranjero 
en las rutas, y sin hablar, 

le siguió, sin saberle nombre, 
porque el hombre parece al mar. 

 
Y Lucila, que hablaba a río, 
a montaña y a cañaveral, 
en las lunas de la locura 
recibió reino de verdad. 

 
En las nubes contó diez hijos 

y en los salares su reinar, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            561      

 

  

and in the salt marsh she’s to reign, 
in the rivers she has seen husbands 

and their  cloak in the storm. 
 

But in the Valley of Elqui, 
where there are a hundred mountains or more, 

they sing the other who came 
and the ones who will come will sing: 

 
"In the earth we will be queens, 

and truly to reign 
and being our kingdoms big , 
we will arrive All in the sea. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

en los ríos ha visto esposos 
y su manto en la tempestad. 

 
Pero en el Valle de Elqui, donde 
son cien montañas o son más, 
cantan las otras que vinieron 
y las que vienen cantarán: 

 
"En la tierra seremos reinas, 

y de verídico reinar, 
y siendo grandes nuestros reinos, 

llegaremos todas al mar". 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            562      

 

  

[Index] 

Nicolás Guillén (1902 – 1989) 
 

 
He was born in Camagüey (Cuba). He studied Law in la Havana and he worked  at the 

Governor’s secretariat where he published in 1930 “Motivos del son” . He was Rafael Alberti 
and Pablo Neruda’s guest, he travelled to Spain to attend the 2nd Congress for the Defense of 
Culture. From 1953 to 1958 he left Cuba and he was awarded with the Prize Lenin 1956.  He 
returned to Cuba after the triumph of the revolution.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Camagüey (Cuba). Estudió Derecho en la Habana y trabajo en la secretaría 
de la Gobernación , publicando en 1930 Motivos del son. Invitado por Rafael Alberti y Pablo 
Neruda, se trasladó a España para asistir al II Congreso por la Defensa de la Cultura. Del 
1953 a 1958 se exilia de Cuba y recibe el Premio Lenin 1956. Regresó a Cuba después del 
triunfo de la revolución.  
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            563      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Ballad of Simon Caraballo Balada de Simon Caraballo 

 
Simon sings : 

-¡Oh , I’ve  had a little house 
and a woman! 

Me, 
black Simon Caraballo, 

and today I do not have what to eat. 
The woman died when giving birth, 
I became entangled in the house 

 
Me, 

black Simon Caraballo, 
I don’t play, I neither drink  nor   dance, 

I almost neither know who I am. 
 

Me, 
black Simon Caraballo, 

now I sleep under a gate 
my pillow is on a brick, 

my bed is  on the ground. 
The scabies eat me alive, 

the rheumatism binds my  foot; 
cold moon at night 

early morning without coffee. 
I do not know what to do with my arms. 

But I will find what to do: 
 

Me, 
black Simon Caraballo, 

I have got the fists clenched, 
I have got the fists 

Clenched and I need to eat! 
 

-¡Hey Simon, there comes the guard 
with his horse of swords! 

 
Canta Simón: 

-¡Ay, yo tuve una casita 
y una mujer! 

Yo, 
negro Simón Caraballo, 

y hoy no tengo qué comer. 
La mujer murió de parto, 

la casa se m'enredó: 
 

Yo 
negro Simón Caraballo, 
ni toco, ni bebo, ni bailo, 
ni casi sé ya quién soy. 

 
Yo, 

negro Simón Caraballo, 
ahora duermo en un portal; 

mi almohada está en un ladrillo, 
mi cama en el suelo está. 

La sarna me come en vida, 
el reuma me amarra el pie; 

luna fría por la noche 
madrugada sin café. 

¡No sé qué hacer con mis brazos. 
pero encontraré qué hacer:  

 
Yo, 

negro Simón Caraballo, 
tengo los puños cerrados, 
tengo los puños cerrados, 

y necesito comer! 
-¡Simón, que allá viene el guardia 

con su caballo de espadas! 
(Simón se queda callado). 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            564      

 

  

(Simón remains in silence). 
 

-¡Simon there comes he guard 
with his spurs of silver  ! 

(Simon remain sin silence ). 
 

-¡Simon, there comes the guard 
with his stick and his gun, 

and with the hate covering his  face, 
because he’s already heard you singing 

and he’s going to hit you in the back, 
folksinger of old songs, 
husband of your guitar... 

(Simon remains in silence). 
 

A guard of a moustache arrives, 
big and serious, serious and big 

rider in a trotting horse . 
- Simon Caraballo, imprisoned! 
(But Simon does not respond 

because Simon is dead). 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
-¡Simón que allá viene el guardia 

con sus espuelas de lata! 
(Simón se queda callado). 

 
-¡Simón, que allá viene el guardia 

con su palo y su revólver, 
y con el odio en la cara, 
porque ya te oyó cantar 

y te va a dar por la espalda, 
cantador de sones viejos, 
marido de tu guitarra ... 

(Simón se queda callado). 
 

Llega un guardia de bigotes, 
serio y grande, grande y serio, 

jinete en un penco al trote. 
-¡Simón Caraballo, preso! 
(Pero Simón no responde 

porque Simón está muerto). 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            565      

 

  

[Index] 

César Vallejo (1892 – 1938) 
 

 
He was born in Peru of racially mixed blood. He loved Spain passionately where he 

lived at times. He studied Medicine and Philosophy and Humanities at the universities of San 
Marcos and Trujillo. He was expelled from France for political reasons. Then he moved to 
Spain where he became a member of the PCE in 1931. During the Spanish Civil War he 
collected funds in Paris for the Popular Front. He stresses his sensitivity for one’s own pain 
and the pain of others. Three great works laid out his poetic itinerary: The black heraldos 
(1918); Trilce (1922); Human poems (1939) and Spain draw out from me this chalice, (1940) 
after his death in Paris. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Perú  de sangre mestiza. Amó apasionadamente a España, donde residió 
temporadas. Estudió Medicina y Filosofía y Letras en las universidades de San Marcos y 
Trujillo. Expulsado de Francia por razones políticas, se trasladó a España afiliándose al PCE 
en 1931. Durante la Guerra Civil española, recaudó fondos en París para el Frente Popular. 
Destaca su sensibilidad para el propio dolor y para el dolor de los demás. Su trayectoria 
poética está jalonada por tres grandes obras: Los heraldos negros (1918); Trilce (1922); 
Poemas humanos (1939) y España aparta de mi este cáliz, (1940) tras su muerte, en París. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            566      

 

  

[Index] 
 

A man passes by with a loaf of bread 
on his shoulder 

 

Un hombre pasa con un pan al 
hombro 

 
A man passes with a loaf of bread  on his shoulder 

Am I going to write, later, upon my twin? 
Another sits down, scratches, he pulls out a louse under his 

arm, he kills it. 
What courage  is available to speak about psychoanalysis? 
Another has entered into my chest with a stick in his hand 

Speak upon Socrates to the doctor? 
A lame man passes giving his arm to a boy 

Am I going  to read later André Breton? 
Another shivers, coughs, spitting blood 

Can we refer yet to the deep self? 
Another search in the mud bones, shells 

How to write, later, of the infinite? 
A bricklayer falls from a roof, he dies, and has lunch no longer. 

To Innovate, then, the trope, the metaphor? 
A merchant steals a gram in the weight from a customer 

to speak, later, of fourth dimension? 
A banker falsifies his balance 

How to cry in the theatre? 
A pariah sleeps with the foot on the back 

To Speak, later, to nobody about Picasso? 
Somebody sobs attending  a burial 
How to enter then in the Academy? 

Somebody cleans a rifle in the kitchen 
What courage is needed about eternity? 

Somebody passes by counting on the fingers of his hand 
How to speak of the non-I without giving a cry? 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Un hombre pasa con un pan al hombro 

¿Voy a escribir, después, sobre mi doble? 
Otro se sienta, rascase, extrae un piojo de la axila, mátalo 

¿Con qué valor hablar del psicoanálisis? 
Otro ha entrado a mi pecho con un palo en la mano 
¿Hablar luego de Sócrates al médico? Un cojo pasa 

dando el brazo a un niño 
¿ Voy, después, a leer a André Bretón?Otro tiembla de 

frío, tose, escupe sangre 
¿Cabrá aludir jamás al Yo profundo? Otro busca en el 
fango huesos, cáscaras ¿Cómo escribir, después, del 

infinito? Un albañil cae de un techo, muere y ya no 
almuerza 

¿Innovar, luego, el tropo, la metáfora? 
Un comerciante roba un gramo en el peso a un cliente 
¿Hablar, después, de cuarta dimensión? Un banquero 

falsea su balance 
¿Con qué cara llorar en el teatro? 

Un paria duerme con el pie a la espalda ¿Hablar, 
después, a nadie de Picasso? Alguien va en un entierro 

sollozando 
¿Cómo luego ingresar a la Academia? Alguien limpia un 

fusil en su cocina 
¿Con qué valor hablar del más allá? Alguien pasa 

contando con sus dedos 
¿Cómo hablar del no-yo sin dar un grito? 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            567      

 

  

[Index] 

Pablo Neruda (1904 - 1973) 
 

 
His name was Neftalí Ricardo Reyes. He was  born in Parral, Linares, Chile in 1904. 

His writings laid aside he held several diplomatic charges in China, Ceylon and Burma. From 
his prolific poetry he draws its variety. The different facets of his poetry has turned him into a 
master for poets of different signs. His social engaged poetry inspires those who draw 
themselves towards social or civil services and his contributions to the renovation of the 
poetic language have been a model for the poets of vanguard. Twenty poems of love and one 
desperate song, (1924); Spain in the heart (1937) and General Song (1950). He was appointed 
Ambassador of Chile in Paris by president Salvador Allende. He was awarded with the 
Literature Nobel Prize already as refugee in  1971. He died in Chile in 1973. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

De nombre Neftalí Ricardo Reyes, nació en Parral, Linares, Chile, en 1904. Además 
de escribir, ocupó varios cargos diplomáticos en China, Ceilán y Birmania. Es un poeta 
fecundísimo, de ello se deriva su variedad. Sus múltiples facetas han convertido a Neruda en 
un maestro para poetas de muy diverso signo: su poesía comprometida inspira a quienes se 
orientan hacia lo social o civil,; y sus aportaciones a la renovación de la lengua poética han 
sido modelo para los poetas de vanguardia. Veinte poemas de amor y una canción 
desesperada, (1924); España en el corazón (1937) y Canto general (1950). Fue nombrado 
embajador de Chile en París por el presidente Salvador Allende y recibió, en el exilio, el 
Premio Nóbel de Literatura de 1971. Murió en Chile en 1973.  
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            568      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The heavenly poets 

 

Los poetas celestes 
 

What did you do followers of Guide, 
intellectualists, followers of Rilke 

mysterious, false existential sorcerers, 
surrealist poppies  lit 

in a tomb, Europeanised 
corpses of the fashion, 

pale worms of the capitalist cheese; 
What did you when  the reign of the anguish, 

set against this dark Human being , 
to this kicked composure, 

to immerse his head 
into the manure, 

of this essence of rough stamped lives? 
You did anything but escape 
You sold piled-up detritus, 

you seek for heavenly hairs, 
coward plants, broken nails, 

"pure Beauty", "spell", 
a piece of work of poor frightened 

to evade the eyes, 
to entangle the delicate pupils, 

to subsist with the dish of dirty remainders 
thrown by the Master, 

without seeing the stone  in agony, 
without defence, without conquer, 

blinder than the crowns of the cemetery, when 
the rain falls  over  the motionless 
rotten flowers falls of the tombs. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Qué hicisteis vosotros gidistas, 

intelectualistas, rilkistas, 
misterizantes, falsos brujos 

existenciales, amapolas 
surrealistas encendidas  

en una tumba, europeizados 
cadáveres de la moda, 

pálidas lombrices del queso 
capitalista, qué hicisteis 

ante el reinado de la angustia,  
frente a este oscuro ser humano, 

a esta pateada compostura, 
a esta cabeza sumergida 

en el estiércol, a esta esencia 
de ásperas vidas pisoteadas?  
No hicisteis nada sino la fuga: 
vendisteis hacinado detritus, 
buscasteis cabellos celestes, 
plantas cobardes, uñas rotas, 
«Belleza pura», «sortilegio»,  
obra de pobres asustados 
para evadir los ojos, para 
enmarañar las delicadas 

pupilas, para subsistir 
con el plato de restos sucios  
que os arrojaron los señores, 
sin ver la piedra en agonía, 
sin defender, sin conquistar, 
más ciegos que las coronas 
del cementerio, cuando cae  
la lluvia sobre las inmóviles 

flores podridas de las tumbas. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            569      

 

  

[Index] 

Alfonsina Storni (1892 – 1938) 
 

 
She was born in Capriasca, in Italian Switzerland, in 1892, but she was taken to 

Argentina very young where she spent all her childhood in San Juan and San Jose. In 1916 
she published The restlessness and the rose garden, irremediably, (1919), Languor, (1920), 
and Ochre (1925). She encloses in her verses the feeling of the humiliated feminine condition, 
with sensitive  and bitter tones: The sweet damage (1918). She suffered from  cancer and she 
committed suicide in Mar del Plata (Argentina) in 1938. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Capriasca, en la Suiza italiana, en 1892, pero fue llevada muy niña a 
Argentina., donde pasó su niñez , en San Juan y San José. En 1916 publicó La inquietud y el 
rosal, irremediablemente, (1919), Languidez, (1920), y Ocre (1925). Encierra en sus versos el 
sentimiento de la humillada condición femenina, con tonos sensuales o amargos : El dulce 
daño (1918). Enferma de cáncer, se suicidó en Mar del Plata en 1938. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            570      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Green lizard 

 

Lagarto verde 
The little count of Lemonade, 

playful, baby child…A charming child,  
rolling, baby child and playful, 
in the ballroom of Cristobalón. 

His happy face of capuchin monkey 
to all says:  —Yes.  

 —Yes, Madam Calofé, Monsieur Haiti,  
here and there. 

While the aristocratic monkeys 
pass armed as cocomacacos 
solemnly from black nobility, 

the Count, baby child and playful, 
is a fluid of delicacy  

who fills with the ballroom 
—Yes, Madam Calofé, Monsieur Haiti,  

here and there 
—See him in the rigodón,  

look at him in the minuet.  .. 
Nobody in the court  of Cristobalón 

wears the greatcoat with such elegance, 
neither swings his foot with such a charm 

His social formula is:  Oh, pardon! 
His elegant word:  Voluptuousness! 

Oh, but in front of  His Highness  
never dare to say green lizard, 

thus getting mad instantly the fine aristocrat is spoilt! 
And there he goes the Count of Lemonade, 

with the agitated red jacket 
and the wild jaw rigid in epileptic tension... 
There, he goes with grotesque gestures, 

multiplying the orang-utans 
through the mirrors of Cristobalón. 

Translated by:  dabne

 

El Condesito de la Limonada, 
juguetón, pequeñín .. . Una monada 

rodando, pequeñín y juguetón, 
por los salones de Cristobalón. 

Su alegre rostro de tití 
a todos dice: —Sí. 

—Sí, Madame Calofé, Monsieur Haití, 
por allí, por aquí. 

Mientras los aristócratas macacos 
pasan armados de cocomacacos 

solemnemente negros de nobleza, 
el Conde, pequeñín; y juguetón, 

es un fluido de delicadeza 
que llena de finuras el salón. 

—Sí, Madame Calofé, Monsieur Haití, 
por allí, por aquí— 

Vedle en el rigodón, 
miradle en el minué . .. 

Nadie en la Corte de Cristobalón 
lleva con tanta gracia el casacón 
ni con tanto donaire mueve el pie. 
Su fórmula social es: ¡oh, pardon! 

Su palabra elegante: ¡volupté! 
¡Ah, pero ante Su Alteza 

jamás oséis decir lagarto verde, 
pues perdiendo al instante la cabeza 

todo el fino aristócrata se pierde! 
Y allá va el Conde de la Limonada, 

con la roja casaca alborotada 
y la fiera quijada 

rígida en epiléptica tensión ... 
Allá, va entre grotescos ademanes, 

multiplicando los orangutanes 
en los espejos de Cristobalón. 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            571      

 

  

[Index] 

Jorge Enrique Adoum (1926) 
 

 
He was an Ecuadorian writer, who was Edition director of the House of the 

Ecuadorian Culture and later civil servant of the United Nations and UNESCO. The social 
worries were present in his first book of poems, Bitter Ecuador (1949), and soon, under the 
influence of Pablo Neruda (his personal secretary during some time), in The origins (1952), 
The enemy and the morning (1952), God brought the shade (1959) ,Gilded and The nocturnal 
occupations (1961), volumes gathered in The Earth notebooks (1961), a remarkable poetic 
effort to recover the historical experiences of the Ecuadorian man since his origins up to the 
painful times of the conquest and colonization. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Escritor ecuatoriano que fue director de Ediciones de la Casa de la Cultura 
Ecuatoriana y después funcionario de las Naciones Unidas y de la Unesco. Las 
preocupaciones sociales estuvieron muy presentes en su primer poemario, Ecuador amargo 
(1949), y luego, bajo la influencia de Pablo Neruda (de quien fue secretario personal durante 
algún tiempo), en Los orígenes (1952), El enemigo y la mañana (1952), Dios trajo la sombra 
(1959) y El dorado y Las ocupaciones nocturnas (1961), volúmenes que conforman Los 
cuadernos de la tierra (1961), notable esfuerzo poético por recuperar las experiencias 
históricas del hombre ecuatoriano desde sus orígenes hasta los dolorosos tiempos de la 
conquista y colonización.  
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            572      

 

  

[Index] 
 

After the gunpowder -manuela 

 

Tras la pólvora -Manuela 

 
You sleep golden and homeless, 

site  of my next battle. 
The continent alike: love in rest, animal back in the foam. 
(If that sweet night rocks the night of Jamaica- almost if 
I would have found a knife stabbed blindly in my chest , 

I would not have found you 
and only it would have been a disappointing 

incomplete corpse, half murdered). 
But this night, you face 

- downward a mare galloping pulling up 
the submission to the brakes in pieces- 

you abandon me you hard cracked rose, 
there is no danger, and my destiny in yourself takes place. 

You face-upward-a ship which directs its bow against 
the unjust wind- you trust me your cutwater of hair, 

and I do not make peace: 
I know that both, continent and girl, 

with not a withdrawal: they  accumulate riots in the dream, 
headquarters without harass  for satisfaction , blood shackled, 

and they will explode asking for more battles at breakfast. 
 

(..) 
 

Outside the city goes on and I reject 
his brilliance under your tongue. 

I seem a winner and hostage your camp: 
there it wraps your bandage to your faithful thigh, 

and your flame bites me:  Occupation of a good-bye in 
holidays. 

History remained in the suit, 
thrown at night on a chair, 

but naked only I want that name which I listen in your mouth, 
only the intermittent statue with two navels 
and that map of veins where I don’t get lost. 

 
Duermes dorada y desguarnecida, sitio 

de mi próxima batalla. Igual duerme 
el continente: el amor en reposo, lomo 

animal en la espuma. 
(Si esa noche -melosa 

hamaca la noche de Jamaica- la cuchillada a ciegas 
me hubiera hallado de perfil el corazón, no te habría 

encontrado, y solo habría sido decepcionante 
cadáver incompleto, mitad de asesinado). 

Pero esta noche, tú bocabajo -yegua al galope 
arrancándole al sometimiento los frenos en pedazos- 

me abandonas tu dura rosa hendida, no hay 
peligro, y mi destino en ti tiene lugar. 

Tú bocarriba -nave que arremete 
su proa contra el viento injusto- 

me confías tu tajamar de pelo, y no hago la paz: 
yo sé que ambos, continente y muchacha, no están 

en retirada: acumulan revueltas bajo el sueño, 
sedes sin prisa por saciarse, sangres maniatadas, 
y estallarán pidiendo más combate al desayuno. 

 
(...) 

 
Afuera sigue la ciudad y yo renuncio 

a su fulgor debajo de tu lengua. Parezco triunfador y rehén 
tu campamento: allí 

se me adhiere tu venda de muslo fiel 
y urgente, y me muerde tu llama: 

ocupación de un adiós en vacaciones. 
La historia se quedó en el traje, tirada 

por la noche en una silla, pero desnudos 
sólo quiero ese nombre que te oigo con la boca, 

sólo la intermitente estatua a dos ombligos 
y ese mapa de venas donde no me extravío. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            573      

 

  

Let’s count in the morning the medals 
left during the night with its bites, 

cover them with the usual spoils of my shirt, 
dress me up of solitary, widower, single, 

and get me back to the others 
(last night I forgot of his abstinence 

when I enter in your rings), 
and deny me your entry , throw me your form, 

is redo it  with a single back. 
And that I can be able to leave -Monday of each day- 

to complete freedom among the two, 
onnection barely began. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Contemos en la mañana las condecoraciones 
que nos dejó la noche con sus mordeduras, 
cúbrelas con el despojo usual de mi camisa, 

vísteme de solitario, de viudo, de soltero, 
y devuélveme a los demás (anoche me olvidé 

de su abstinencia al entrar en tus anillos), 
y niéguenme tus abras, écheme 

tu forma, rehágase con una sola espalda. 
Y que pueda yo salir -lunes de cada día- a completar 
la libertad entre los dos, cópula apenas comenzada. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            574      

 

  

[Index] 

Roque Dalton (1935-1975) 
 

 
He was born in San Salvador, (El Salvador). He studied Law and Anthropology at the 

Universities of El Salvador, Chile and Mexico. Since very young he devoted to journalism 
and Literature, being awarded in national competitions and Central American countries 
competitions. He published his first poems in the magazine Hoja (Leaf) (Friends of the 
Culture, San Salvador, 1956) and in Latin Diary of the same city. Due to his political 
militancy, he underwent prison and exile. He emigrated to Guatemala, Mexico, Cuba, 
Czechoslovakia, Korea, North Vietnam and other countries. He was murdered by his own 
comrades on 10th May 1975. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nacido en San Salvador, El Salvador, estudia derecho y antropología en las 
Universidades de El Salvador, Chile y México. Desde muy joven se dedica al periodismo y a 
la literatura, obteniendo diversos galardones en certámenes nacionales y centroamericanos. 
Publica sus primeros poemas en la revista Hoja (Amigos de la Cultura, San Salvador, 1956) y 
en Diario Latino, de la misma ciudad. Por su militancia política, sufre cárceles y destierros. 
Vive emigrado en Guatemala, México, Cuba, Checoslovaquia, Corea, Vietnam del Norte y 
otros países. Muere asesinado por sus propios compañeros el 10 de mayo de 1975. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 

http://www.patriagrande.net/uruguay/eduardo.galeano/memoria.del.fuego/index.php?mes=mayo


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            575      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Poem of love 

 

Poema de amor 

 
The ones who widespread the Panama Channel 

(and were classified as "silver roll" and not like "gold roll"), 
the ones who repaired the fleet of the Pacific 

in the bases of California, 
the ones who got rotted in the jails of Guatemala, 

Mexico, Honduras, Nicaragua, 
accused of being thieves, smugglers,  swindlers by con artists, 

by hungry, 
always suspicious  of everything 

("I allow myself  to send him to you 
as a suspicious idler 

and with the dangerous nickname of  Salvadorian"), 
those who  crowded the bars and the brothels 

of all the ports and the  big cities around 
the sewers of corn in the complete foreign jungle , 

the kings of the red page, 
the ones who nobody   never knows where they come from, 

the best artisans of the world, 
the ones who were sewn up by bullets Al when to crossing the 

border, 
the ones who died from malaria 

or stung by the scorpion or by the yellow beard 
in the hell of the banana plantations, 

the ones who cried drunken for the national anthem 
cried under the  Pacific cyclone or the snow of the north, 

the opportunists, the beggars, the pot smokers, 
the guanacos bitch children 

the ones who barely could return, 
the ones who  were more lucky, 

the undocumented  forever, 
the one who make all, the ones who sell all, the ones who eat 

all, 
the first in taking out the knife, 

the sad the saddest of the world 

 
Los que ampliaron el Canal de Panamá 

(y fueron clasificados como "silver roll" y no como "gold 
roll"), 

los que repararon la flota del Pacífico 
en las bases de California, 

los que se pudrieron en la cárceles de Guatemala, 
México, Honduras, Nicaragua, 

por ladrones, por contrabandistas, por estafadores, 
por hambrientos, 

los siempre sospechosos de todo 
("me permito remitirle al interfecto 

por esquinero sospechoso 
y con el agravante de ser salvadoreño"), 
las que llenaron los bares y los burdeles 

de todos los puertos y las capitales de la zona 
los sembradores de maíz en plena selva extranjera, 

los reyes de la página roja, 
los que nunca sabe nadie de dónde son, 

los mejores artesanos del mundo, 
los que fueron cosidos a balazos al cruzar la frontera, 

los que murieron de paludismo 
o de las picadas del escorpión o de la barba amarilla 

en el infierno de las bananeras, 
los que lloraran borrachos por el himno nacional  
bajo el ciclón del Pacífico o la nieve del norte, 

los arrimados, los mendigos, los marihuaneros, 
los guanacos hijos de la gran puta, 
los que apenitas pudieron regresar, 

los que tuvieron un poco más de suerte, 
los eternos indocumentados, 

los hacelotodo, los vendelotodo, los comelotodo, 
los primeros en sacar el cuchillo, 
los tristes más tristes del mundo, 

mis compatriotas, 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            576      

 

  

My countrymen, 
my brothers. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

mis hermanos. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            577      

 

  

[Index] 

Roberto Fernández Retamar (1930-...) 
 

 
He was a Cuban poet born in Havana. He got the master's degree in Philosophy and 

Humanities and after he achieved the doctor degrees at the Sorbona and at the University of 
London. He was invited by the University of Yale to offer a course on Hispano-American 
Literature and lectured on Hispano-American Literature at the universities of Prague and 
Bratislava. He was awarded with Poetry Prize by his book Patrias (Mother countries) in 1951, 
the Latin American Poetry Prize Rubén Darío, the Poetry International Nikola Vaptsarov 
Prize of Bulgaria, the Poetry International Prize Perez Bonalde, of Argentina, the Literary 
Critic Prize by Aquí (Here) in 1996 and the official Medal of the Arts and the Letters, granted 
in France in 1998. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Poeta cubano nacido en La Habana. Se licenció en Filosofía y Letras y luego  se 
doctoró en La Sorbona y en la Universidad de Londres. Fue invitado por la Universidad de 
Yale para ofrecer un curso sobre Literatura hispanoamericana y dictó conferencias sobre 
Literatura hispanoamericana en las universidades de Praga y Bratislava.  Obtuvo el Premio 
Nacional de Poesía por su libro «Patrias» en 1951, el Premio Latinoamericano de Poesía 
Rubén Darío, el Premio Internacional de Poesía Nikola Vaptsarov de Bulgaria, el Premio 
Internacional de Poesía Pérez Bonalde, de Argentina,  el Premio de la Crítica Literaria por 
«Aquí» en 1996 y la Medalla oficial de las Artes y las Letras, otorgada en Francia, en 1998.  
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            578      

 

  

 

[Index] 
 

Sleep, dream, do 

 

Duerme, sueña haz 

 
"He  sleeps under the Angels, dreams under the Saints" 

Rubén Darío 
They throw down walls which never should exist 

And they raise or they reinforce other which should not exist 
either 

And one  day they will have a roared crash. 
Some tanks go ahead in the shadow. 

They knock down statues of brave combatants 
Whose true images were erected in the heart for ever. 
They disappear or they appear or countries are torn 

And some others invaded, mutilated, 
And there are places where crime is celebrated with flower 

parties 
Which denounces a lonely girl with a  low voice among high 

glass windows. 
They shift weapons in a different direction whether now they 

only aim at the South. 
 

And you, 
Prince, champion, pirate, captain, clump of feathers, 

Robin of forests of linen till now, 
Red Tiger 

Through whom they have  reappeared after many decades 
The names of the older children 

Who would be happy so much to know 
If they were not already dust in the shadow, shadow in the 

dust; you, 
Desired in long nights in Africa, 

He was conceived in Cuba with love, for love, 
Without knowing that today on your rose shoulders. 

You should keep  the constellations of fire and history, 
More rigorous, more implacable than constellations, 

You are complying your first two months of life. 

 
«Duerme bajo los Ángeles, sueña bajo los Santos» 

Rubén Darío 
Echan abajo muros que nunca debieron existir 

Y levantan o refuerzan otros que no deben existir tampoco 
Y un día serán a su vez abajados con estruendo. 

Avanzan tanques en la sombra. 
Derriban estatuas de gallardos combatientes 

Cuyas imágenes verdaderas fueron erigidas para siempre 
en 

el alma. 
Desaparecen o aparecen o se desgarran país 

Y otros son invadidos, mutilados, 
Y hay lugares donde se celebra con fiestas de colores el 

Crimen 
Que denuncia una vocecita de niña sola entre altos 

cristales. 
Cambian de rumbo armas que ahora sólo apuntan al Sur. 

 
Y tú, 

Príncipe, campe6n, pirata, capitán, copo de plumas, 
Robin por ahora de bosques de lino, 

Tigre rojo 
En quien tras muchas décadas han reaparecido 

Los nombres de los hijos mayores 
De quienes se alegrarían tanto de saberlo 

Si no fueran ya polvo en la sombra, sombra en el polvo; 
tú, 

Deseado en largas noches de África, 
Concebido en Cuba por amor, para el amor, 
Sin saber que en tus hombros hoy de rosa 

Debes sostener las constelaciones de fuego y la historia, 
Más rigurosa, más implacable que las constelaciones, 
Estás cumpliendo tus primeros dos meses de haber 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            579      

 

  

To this strange planet, to this incredible house in flames. 
And as you were born eagle and not bell snake, 

A colt free in the plain and not a lamb, 
You ought to redo it and to enlarge it 

Inch by inch, 
Warble by warble, 
Flower by flower. 

Forgive them, 
Forgive us, 

 
Forgive me, 

Phocás. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

venido 
A este extraño planeta, a esta increíble casa en llamas. 

Y como naciste águila y no serpiente de cascabel, 
Potro libre en la llanura y no borrego, 

Te toca rehacerla y engrandecerla 
Palmo a palmo, 

Trino a trino, 
Flor a flor. 

Perdónalos, 
Perdónanos, 

 
Perdóname, 

Phocás. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            580      

 

  

[Index] 

Carlos Castro Saavedra (1924-1989) 
 

 
He was a Colombian poet born in Medellín. He was  of a great versatility; he began 

under the lyrical invocation of the love and after  harvested his first literary triumphs, the poet 
shifted his interest to Earth and the Mother country topics and  returning finally to the loving 
thematic.. In addition to the great verse production, he wrote ten books of poetic prose. He 
wrote also theatre plays and stories for children whose content have a remarkable poetic 
accent. In his poems of love it’s always present the gentleness, melody and colour. In 1954 he 
published the first personal poetry anthology entitled Poetic Selection. In 1962 it appeared the 
second anthology with the name of Select Work and in 1974, another one entitled Selected 
Poems. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Poeta colombiano nacido en la ciudad de Medellín. Dueño de una gran versatilidad, se 
inició bajo la advocación lírica del amor, y cosechados los primeros triunfos literarios, el 
poeta desplazó su interés hacia los temas de la Tierra y la Patria, regresando finalmente a la 
temática amorosa. Además de la gran producción en verso, escribió diez libros de prosa 
poética. Incursionó además en el teatro y en los cuentos para niños cuyo contenido tiene un 
marcado acento poético. En sus poemas de amor siempre está presente la delicadeza, la 
melodía y el color. En 1954 publicó su primera antología personal de poesía denominada 
Selección poética. En 1962 apareció la segunda con el nombre de Obra selecta y en 1974, 
Poemas escogidos. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            581      

 

  

[Index] 
 

My name is Carlos 

 

Me llamo Carlos 

 
My name is Carlos, I am new, I am from America, 

I live in the south of America with a recent son, 
my feet are clear and wide as the early morning, 

my face performs in the mornings , all my body is green, 
Buffalo and horses graze in my chest 

and the sun opens poppies with its warm hand. 
I believe in the fisherman, in its fish and in its nets 

I like to unveil pigeons in the town 
I always wait a letter with news of the world 
I wait for bread, peace, love, table cloths, 

I wait for my son next to the station 
And I think that the future is going to arrive in the trains; 

I defend my hope, I love my youth, 
I put a kiss in the front door of my house, 

I put it with Love’s sentry, 
After I go, I go from bullet to bullet, 

From grenade to grenade removing the war 
 

I know we’re a lot, that we are almost all, 
We are millions of men and of birds, 

millions of women and of dawns, 
We e are a worldwide family of brightness 

And there is neither a single brother who wants to be soldier 
And  nor a  single soldier 

Who wants to shoot the flowers. 
Nobody wants trenches, we  all want furrows, 

We want stems instead of rifles, 
And instead of munitions we want sweet seeds 

And granaries full of March and April. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Me llamo Carlos, soy nuevo, soy de América, 
vivo en el sur de América con un hijo reciente, 

mis pies son claros y anchos como la madrugada, 
mi rostro es matinal, todo mi cuerpo es verde, 

sobre mi pecho pastan búfalos y caballos 
y el sol abre amapolas con su mano caliente. 

Creo en el pescador, en sus pescados y en sus redes, 
me gusta ver el pueblo estrenando palomas,  

siempre espero una carta con noticias del mundo, 
espero el pan, la paz, el amor, los manteles, 

espero mi hijo junto a las estaciones 
y pienso que el futuro va a llegar en los trenes; 

defiendo mi esperanza, amo mi juventud, 
pongo un beso en la puerta de mi casa, 

lo pongo con amor de centinela,  
después me voy, me voy de bala en bala, 

de granada en granada deshojando la guerra. 
Yo sé que somos muchos, que somos casi todos, 

somos millones de hombres y de pájaros, 
millones de mujeres y de auroras, 

somos una familia mundial de resplandores 
y no hay un solo hermano que quiera ser soldado 

ni hay un solo soldado 
que quiera disparar sobre las flores. 

Nadie quiere trincheras, todos queremos surcos, 
queremos tallos en lugar de fusiles, 

y en vez de municiones queremos dulces granos 
y graneros repletos de marzos y de abril. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            582      

 

  

[Index] 

Nicanor Parra (1914....) 
 

 
He was a poet, story teller  and essays writer who was born in San Fabian of Alico 

(Chile). Although he belonged to a simple farmer family he inherited a great artistic 
sensitivity. After his basic studies he was graduated as professor of Mathematics at the 
Grammar School of Chillán and at the University of Chile, in 1938. During several years he 
lived in the United States and England returning to Chile in 1951. Since 1937  he wrote some 
stories and essays, maintaining alive its poetic vocation on evocative and sentimental tone 
(Cancionero sin nombre (Song book without name), 1937). As years passed he adopted a 
strand denominated "antipoetry" (Poems and antipoems, 1954). In 1969 he was awarded with 
the National Prize of Literature of Chile by Obra gruesa (Heavy Work). In 1991 He was 
awarded for the second time in his country with the International Prize Juan Rulfo. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 
 

Poeta, cuentista y ensayista chileno nacido en San Fabián de Alico. Aunque perteneció 
a una sencilla familia campesina, heredó de sus padres una gran sensibilidad artística. 
Después de sus estudios básicos se recibió como profesor de Matemáticas en el Liceo de 
Chillán y en la Universidad de Chile, en 1938. Durante varios años estuvo en Estados Unidos 
e Inglaterra regresando a Chile en 1951. Desde 1937 incursionó en el cuento y el ensayo, 
manteniendo viva su vocación poética de tono evocativo y sentimental (Cancionero sin 
nombre, 1937). Con el paso de los años adoptó una línea que él mismo denominó "antipoesía" 
(Poemas y antipoemas, 1954).  En 1969 recibió el Premio Nacional de Literatura de Chile por 
Obra gruesa. En 1991 fue galardonado por segunda vez en su país y obtuvo  el Premio 
Internacional Juan Rulfo.  
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            583      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The imaginary man 

 

El hombre imaginario 

 
The imaginary man 

Lives in an imaginary house 
Surrounded by imaginary trees 

At the edge of an imaginary river. 
On the walls there hang pictures which are imaginary 

Irreparable imaginary cracks 
Which represent imaginary facts 
In places and in imaginary times. 

All imaginary afternoons 
He goes up imaginary stairs 

And  appears in an  imaginary balcony 
To look at the imaginary landscape 
that consists on an imaginary valley 

Encircled by imaginary hills. 
Imaginary shadows 

Come along by the imaginary  way 
Singing imaginary songs 

At the death of the imaginary sun 
And  at nights of the imaginary moon 
He dreams of the imaginary woman 
Who offered him her imaginary love 

He feels again that same pain 
And  it palpitates again 

The heart of the imaginary man. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
El hombre imaginario 

Vive en una mansión imaginaria 
Rodeada de árboles imaginarios 
A la orilla de un río imaginario. 

De los muros que son imaginarios 
Penden antiguos cuadros que son imaginarios 

Irreparables grietas imaginarias 
Que representan hechos imaginarios 

En lugares y tiempos imaginarios. 
Todas las tardes imaginarias 

Sube las escaleras imaginarias 
Y se asoma al balcón imaginario 
A mirar el paisaje imaginario que 
Consiste en una valle imaginario 

Circundado de cerros imaginarios. 
Sombras imaginarais 

Vienen por el camino imaginario 
Entonando canciones imaginarias 

A la muerte del sol imaginario 
Y en las noches de la luna imaginaria 

Sueña con la mujer imaginaria 
Que le brindó su amor imaginario 
Vuelve a sentir ese mismo dolor 

Y vuelve a palpitar 
El corazón del hombre imaginario. 

 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            584      

 

  

[Index] 

José Martí (1853 - 1895) 
 

 
He was born in Havana, Cuba, a son of Spaniards. He got the master's degree in Law 

and Philosophy and Humanities. He was imprisoned accused of conspiracy and deported to 
Spain in 1871 and 1879. He married in Mexico to the writer Maria Zayas,. He returned  to 
Cuba for the Independence blow. He was dead in Dos Ríos in 1895.  
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en la Habana, Cuba, hijo de españoles. Se licenció en Derecho y Filosofía y 
Letras. Fue encarcelado  acusado de conspiración y deportado a España en 1871 y 1879. Se 
casó en México con María Zayas, escritora. Vuelve a Cuba  para iniciar el levantamiento por 
la independencia. Fue muerto en Dos Ríos en 1895. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            585      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Simple verses 

 

Versos sencillos 

 
I am a sincere man 

where  the palm grows, 
and before I die 

I want to throw my intimate verses. 
 

I come from everywhere, 
and I go towards everywhere. 

I am Art among arts, 
in the hills , I am a hill. 

 
I know the strange names 
of the grass and flowers, 

and of mortal deceits, 
and of sublime pains. 

 
I have seen in the dark night 

When to raining  over my head 
Rays of pure light 
of divine beauty. 

 
I saw giving to birth  wings on the shoulders 

of beautiful women: 
And leave from the debris 

flying the butterflies. 
 

I have seen a man living 
with the dagger at his side 

without never uttering the name 
of whom has killed him. 

 
Quick as a reflection 

I saw the soul twice ,two times: 
When the old man died, 

When she said to me good-bye. 

 
Yo soy un hombre sincero 
de donde crece la palma, 
y antes de morirme quiero 
echar mis versos del alma. 

 
Yo vengo de todas partes, 
y hacia todas partes voy: 
arte soy entre las artes, 

en los montes, monte soy. 
 

Yo sé los nombres extraños 
de las yerbas y las flores, 
y de mortales engaños, 
y de sublimes dolores. 

 
Yo he visto en la noche oscura 

llover sobre mi cabeza 
os rayos de lumbre pura 

de la divina belleza. 
 

Alas nacer vi en los hombros 
de las mujeres hermosas: 
y salir de los escombros 
volando las mariposas. 

 
He visto vivir a un hombre 
con el puñal al costado, 

sin decir jamás el nombre 
de aquella que lo ha matado. 

 
Rápida, como un reflejo, 

dos veces vi el alma, dos: 
cuando murió el pobre viejo, 
cuando ella me dijo adiós. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            586      

 

  

 
I trembled once, -near the gate 
Ate the entrance of the vineyard 

When the wild bee 
Bit the girl on her forehead 

 
I enjoyed once, in such  a way 

That I enjoyed as never before-when 
The prison head director read 

My death sentence crying. 
 

I hear a sigh, through 
the lands and the sea, 

and it is not a sigh 
It’s because my son is going to awake. 

 
If they say that I took from the jeweller 

The best jewel, 
I take a sincere friend 
And leave love aside. 

 
I have seen the wounded eagle 

Flying towards the calm sky 
And die in its lair 

The viper of poison. 
 

I know well that when the world 
Gives in, livid, the rest 
Upon the deep silence 

Whispers the harmless stream. 
 

I have placed the daring hand, 
Motionless of horror and joy 

Upon the lifeless star 
Which fell in front of my door. 

 
Hidden in my brave chest 

hardly it wounds me: 

 
Temblé una vez, -en la reja, 

a la entrada de la viña,- 
cuando la bárbara abeja 

picó en la frente a mi niña. 
 

Gocé una vez, de tal suerte 
que gocé cual nunca: -cuando 

la sentencia de mi muerte 
leyó el alcaide llorando. 

 
Oigo un suspiro, a través 

de las tierras y la mar, 
y no es un suspiro, -es 

que mi hijo va a despertar. 
 

Si dicen que del joyero 
tome la joya mejor, 

tomo a un amigo sincero 
y pongo a un lado el amor. 

 
Yo he visto al águila herida 

volar al azul sereno, 
y morir en su guarida 
la víbora del veneno. 

 
Yo sé bien que cuando el mundo 

cede, lívido, al descanso, 
sobre el silencio profundo 
murmura el arroyo manso. 

 
Yo he puesto la mano osada, 

de horror y júbilo yerta, 
sobre la estrella apagada 

que cayó frente a mi puerta. 
 

Oculto en mi pecho bravo 
a pena que me lo hiere: 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            587      

 

  

The son of a slaved town 
Who lives for him, keeps quiet and dies. 

 
All is beautiful and constant. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

el hijo de un pueblo esclavo 
vive por él, calla, y muere. 

 
Todo es hermoso y constante. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            588      

 

  

[Index] 

Idea Vilariño (1920) 
 

 
She was a Uruguayan poetess who was  born in Montevideo in 1920. Besides  poetess, 

she was a critical literary, translator, composer and educator. Her personality and convictions 
made her to reject all type of promotion of her name and her work. In spite of it, her work has 
been translated into other languages and she has been awarded with several international 
prizes. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Poeta uruguaya nacida en Montevideo en 1920. Además de poeta, es crítica literaria, 
traductora, compositora y educadora. Su personalidad y sus convicciones la llevaron durante 
muchos años a rechazar cualquier tipo de promoción de su nombre y de su obra. A pesar de 
ello, ha sido traducida a otros idiomas y ha ganado varios premios internacionales. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            589      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The orientals 

 

Los orientales 

 
Theycome from everywhere, 

blood and courage, 
to save their soil 

the western people 
They come from the blades 
With a spear and a sabre 

Among the grass they sprout 
The westerns 

They set off from the villages 
From the mounts 

in each corner they wait for them 
The western 

Because they left their lives 
Their friends and their goods 

because liberty is more beloved 
because they don’t have it 
because earth is strange 
and freedom is strange 

and because the towns always know how to break their 
chains. 

 
They were ten, twenty, 

They were fifty 
They were a thousand, they’re thousands, 

One doesn’t count them 
Rebels and brave 
they get on going 

the things they love most 
they keep on abandoning them. 

 
With a devastating wind 
They go on devastating 
Like water which cleans 

They come cleaning 

 
De todas partes vienen, 

sangre y coraje, 
para salvar su suelo 

los orientales; 
vienen de las cuchillas, 

con lanza y sable, 
entre las hierbas brotan 

los orientales. 
Salen de los poblados, 

del monte salen, 
en cada esquina esperan 

los orientales. 
Porque dejaron sus vidas, 
sus amigos y sus bienes, 
porque es más querida 

la libertad que no tienen, 
porque es ajena la tierra 

y la libertad ajena 
y porque siempre los pueblos 
saben romper sus cadenas. 

 
Eran diez, eran veinte, 

eran cincuenta, 
eran mil, eran miles, 
ya no se cuentan. 

Rebeldes y valientes 
se van marchando, 

las cosas que más quieren 
abandonando. 

 
Como un viento que arrasa 

van arrasando, 
como un agua que limpia 

vienen limpiando. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            590      

 

  

 
Because they left their lives, 
their friends and their goods, 

because liberty is more beloved 
liberty which they don’t have 
because it’s strange to earth 

and freedom is strange. 
And because towns always 

Know how to break their chains. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Porque dejaron sus vidas, 
sus amigos y sus bienes, 
porque es más querida 

la libertad que no tienen, 
porque es ajena la tierra 

y la libertad ajena 
y porque siempre los pueblos 
saben romper sus cadenas. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            591      

 

  

[Index] 

Salvador Díaz Mirón (1853 - 1928) 
 

 
He was born in Veracruz (México). Owning  a  turbulent life he was  tied  to the 

Modernism. His work includes the books Poetries (1886) and Lascas (1901). In 1928 he 
published the volume of Complete Poetry.  
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Veracruz (México). Poeta de vida turbulenta y vinculado al Modernismo. Su 
obra comprende los libros Poesías (1886) y Lascas (1901). En 1928 publicó el volumen de 
Poesías completas. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            592      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Romance 
(Fragments) 

 

 

Idilio 
(Fragmentos) 

 
At three leagues from a bubbling port 
Which encourages flows and quarrels 

Which once upon a time glory and climate 
Decorate the forehead with palms 

 
There’s a tree and on top of a hill 

A cottage shaped in a cube 
Which from the distance I often 

And laughing leans by a mango trunk 
In the distance the cottage looks like a cap 

with a tassel and a slant on a skull. 
The place is unpleasant because it’s fetid and surly 

The different trees prosper 
And through the wind a smell of dung 
shellfish and mud; and the mosquito 

flies and bothers. 
The vegetation is energetic 

As unharmed and booming supports 
The fury of the northern puff which 

It’isn’t rare from October to February. 
The East sets fire to and give colour 

Like an opal, and diffuses its overtones of dawn 
by river and field. 

And in the magic which is iridescent 
a silver pearl dazzles . 

And at the door of the old shack 
Which inclines its ruin on the hill 

It leans a  sombre tree, 
a rustic and graceful appears 

 
like a dove.. 

Childish for age and size 
It surprises showing off an earlier seasoning 

 
A tres leguas de un puerto bullente 
que a desbordes y grescas anima, 

y al que un tiempo la gloria y el clima 
adornan de palmas la frente, 

hay un árbol breñal, y en la cima 
de un alcor un casucho acubado, 

que de lejos diviso a menudo, 
y riéndose, apoya un costado 

en el tronco de un mango copudo. 
Distante, la choza resulta montera 

con borla y al sesgo sobre una mollera. 
El sitio es ingrato, por fétido y hosco. 

El cardón, el nopal, y la ortiga 
prosperan; y el aire trasciende a boñiga, 

a marisco y a cieno; y el mosco 
pulula y hostiga. 

La flora es enérgica para 
que indemne y pujante soporte 

la furia del soplo del Norte, 
que de octubre a febrero no es rara, 

y la pródiga lumbre febea, 
que de marzo a septiembre caldea. 

El Oriente se inflama y colora, 
como un ópalo inmensa en un lampo, 

y difunde sus tintes de aurora 
por piélago y campo. 

Y en la magia que irisa y corusca, 
un perla de plata se ofusca. [...] 

Y a la  puerta del viejo bohío 
que oblicuando su ruina en la loma 

se recuesta en el árbol sombrío, 
una rústica grácil asoma, 

como una paloma.. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            593      

 

  

Elastic shape of breasts 
and judging its ambiguous plan, 

it does not looks like but a young girl 
who keeps in her breast two oranges. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Infantil por edad y estatura 
sorprende ostentando sazón prematura; 

elásticos bultos de tetas opimas 
y a juzgar por la equívoca traza , 

no semeja sino una rapaza 
que reserva en el seno dos limas.[...] 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            594      

 

  

[Index] 

Manuel José Othón (1856 - 1906) 
 

 
He was born in San Luis de Potosí (Mexico). He studied Law and he exerted as lawyer 

in small farmers towns. In 1900 he was elected deputy. Its poetic activity began in 1880. It 
stands out Poemas rústicos (Rustic Poems) (1902).  
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en San Luis de Potosí México). Estudió Derecho y ejerció de abogado en 
pequeños pueblos campesinos. En 1900 fue elegido diputado. Empezó su actividad poética en 
1880, destacando Poemas rústicos (1902). 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            595      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Sonnets 

 

Sonetos 

I 
 

Why did you come to my frozen solitude? 
Covered with the last cloud 

of a grey twilight?….Look at the landscape 
dry and sad, immensely sad. 

 
If you come from the pain and you nourished 

Your heart, come to the wild 
desert, where barely a sight 

at what it was my youth remains. 
 

But if by any way you don’t come so far, 
and if in your soul still remains pleasure 

you may come back to your restless world. 
 

If not come and wash your cloak 
In the soar sea, very soar sea 

Of a sad love or an immense cry. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

I 
 

¿ Por qué a mi helada soledad viniste 
cubierta con el último celaje 

de un crepúsculo gris?...Mira el paisaje, 
árido y triste, inmensamente triste. 

 
Si vienes del dolor y en él nutriste 
tu corazón, bien vengas al salvaje 
desierto, donde apenas un miraje 
de lo que fue mi juventud existe. 

 
Mas si acaso no vienes de tan lejos, 

y en tu alma aún del placer quedan los dejos, 
puedes retornar a tu revuelto mundo. 

 
Si no, ven a lavar tu cyprio manto 
en el mar amarguísimo y profundo 

de un triste amor o de un inmenso llanto. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            596      

 

  

[Index] 

Salvador Rueda (1857 - 1933) 
 

 
He was born in Malaga (Spain) within a humble family. He moved to Madrid, where 

Núñez de Arce gave him a job in a newspaper called La Gaceta de Madrid. He travelled to 
America and the Philippines. He began his literary activity in 1883 with Noventa estrofas 
(Ninety strophes) and Cuadros de Andalucía (Andalusia’s pictures), books followed by 
Cantos de la vendimia (vendimia Songs) (1891); En tropel (In a mad rush) (1892), and Fuente 
de Salud (Source of Health) (1906), with forewords respectively by Bugler, Rubén Darío and 
Unamuno. He died in Malaga in 1933.  
 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Málaga (España) de familia humilde. Se trasladó a Madrid, donde Núñez de 
Arce lo empleó en La Gaceta de Madrid. viajó por América y Filipinas. Inició su actividad 
literaria en 1883 con Noventa estrofas y cuadros de Andalucía, libros a los que siguieron 
Cantos de la vendimia (1891); En tropel (1892), y Fuente de Salud (1906), prologados 
respectivamente por Clarín, Rubén Darío y Unamuno. Murió en Málaga en 1933. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            597      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The watermelon 

 

La sandía 

 
As if suddenly the day half-opened 

saying good-bye to an intense blaze 
where the almond-shaped dazzling steel 

showed watermelon’s red meat 
 

Incandescent crimson it seemed 
long and dazzling slash, as 

lighted mouth given to gushes of happiness 
Slice after slice pointing out 

 
The knife skilfully separated them 

separating the illusion as never happened before. 
 

The hand suddenly separated them, 
And with no planning a circle of half red moons 

Decorated the plate. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Cual si de pronto se entreabriera el día 

despidiendo una intensa llamarada, 
por el acero fúlgido rasgada 

mostró su carne roja la sandía. 
 

Carmín incandescente parecía 
de larga y deslumbrante cuchillada, 
como boca encendida y desatada 
en frescos borbotones de alegría. 

 
Tajada tras tajada señalando, 

las fue el hábil cuchillo separando 
vivas a la ilusión como ningunas. 

 
Las separó la mano de repente, 
y de improviso decoró la fuente 

un círculo de rojas medias lunas. 

 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            598      

 

  

[Index] 

Francisco A. de Icaza (1863 - 1925) 
 

 
He was born in Mexico. He was a Diplomat. He lived almost entirely in Europe. He 

settled down in Madrid. He was a scholar and a poet. He died in Madrid in 1925.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en México. Diplomático de profesión. Su vida transcurrió casi por entero en 
Europa. Se estableció en Madrid . Era un erudito y un poeta. Murió en Madrid en 1925. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            599      

 

  

[Index] 
 

“Estancias” 

 

Estancias 

 
It’s on  wall, and on the window 
Which has a framework creeper 

I left my verses one morning 
one morning of spring. 

I left my verses in which I said 
with ingenuous phrase troubles of love; 

I left my verses which next day 
Her white hand paid with flowers. 

She’s in the garden and in the grove 
In the bend of that path 

She told me with a very low voice: 
You don’t understand how much I love you: 

Beside the walls of that mill 
Under the shade of those vines 
when the carriage took the road, 

she shouted crying:  Do not forget me! 
All is the same: window and hydra 

Shady places, fresh grapevines 
wall of rough stone; 

and, although it is the same , all has changed. 
There aren’t beloved beings in the house; 

Among the branches there’re flowers, 
there are new leaves and new nests, 
and in our souls there’re new loves. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Esta es el muro, y en la ventana 

que tiene un marco de enredadera 
dejé mis versos una mañana, 
una mañana de primavera. 

Dejé mis versos en que decía 
con frase ingenua cuitas de amores; 

dejé mis versos que al otro día 
su blanca mano pagó con flores. 

Esta es el huerto, y en la arboleda, 
en el recodo de aquel sendero, 
ella me dijo con voz muy queda: 

“ Tú no comprendes lo que te quiero.” 
Junto a las tapias de aquel molino, 
bajo la sombra de aquellas vides, 

cuando el carruaje tomó el camino, 
gritó llorando : “¡ Que no me olvides!” 
Todo es lo mismo: ventana y yedra, 
sitios umbrosos, fresco emparrado 
gala de un muro de tosca piedra; 

y, aunque es lo mismo, todo ha cambiado. 
No hay en la casa seres queridos; 
entre las ramas hay otras flores; 

hay nuevas hojas y nuevos nidos, 
y en nuestras almas nuevos amores. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            600      

 

  

[Index] 

Ramón Mª del Valle – Inclán (1866 - 1936) 
 

 
Ramón del Valle y Peña was born in Vilanova de Arousa (Pontevedra). He studied 

Law at the University of Santiago de Compostela. He moved to Madrid in 1890 and there he 
began his literary activity. He emigrated to Mexico and he enlisted himself in the Mexican 
army a deed which served as inspiration to him for his work Tyrannous Flags (Tirano 
Banderas). His first Féminas book: six loving histories (1895). Sonata of Autumn (Sonata de 
Otoño)1902. Lights of Bohemia (Luces de Bohemia), his first absurdity (esperpento), 1920. In 
1929 he was imprisoned by Primo de Rivera. During the II Spanish Republic he was director 
of the High School of Fine Arts in Rome. He died in 1936, in Santiago de Compostela.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Ramón del Valle y Peña nació en Vilanova de Arousa (Pontevedra) . Estudió Derecho 
en la Universidad de Santiago de Compostela. Se trasladó a Madrid en 1890 y allí comenzó su 
actividad literaria. Emigró a México y se enroló en el ejército mexicano hecho que le sirvió de 
inspiración para su obra Tirano Banderas. Su primer libro Féminas: seis historias amorosas 
1895. Sonata de Otoño 1902. Luces de Bohemia 1920, su primer esperpento. En 1929 fue 
encarcelado por Primo de Rivera. Durante la República fue nombrado director de la Escuela 
Superior de Bellas Artes en Roma. Murió en 1936, en Santiago de Compostela. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            601      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Vile garrotte 

 

Garrote vil 

 
So ¡ ¡ So ¡ ¡ So!  It sings the hammer. 

They’re  raising the club up. 
It sings a  cuckoo in the countryside 

And the stars go with the compass of the verse 
which peals the hammer: 

So!  So!  The scaffold shows up 
Tragic, night and grey; 
the round of the game 

follows round of the anis; 
chops up tobacco with a knife 

and the scaffold appears in the dawn fleur-de lis. 
Rough remote couplet 

Where one listens strums of a large guitar 
Shout of jot of the morapio quarrelsome. 

The cabileño patriotic sings the remote song of 
The glories of Aragon. 

Mischievous hair ate the foot 
of the despicable club amuses itself starving. 

It gives go to sheriff and with a rumour of swarm 
receives hostile the people the hostile Civil Guard. 

A gypsy sells fritters i a courtyard; 
It apears stupid flutists the ears to Al bardal; 

and in the circle of baturros 
The gypsy of the fritters beatifies the murderer. 

He convicted criminal waits in chapel, 
It prays a priest in Latin, 
It cries a yellow candle 

And the criminal eats all the yellow omelette of herbs. 
The dinner went to the chapel. 

 
The hammer sings in the square, 
The executioner earns his living. 

A cloth dresses in black the small bench. 
As the cloth is catalan 

 
¡ Tan ¡ ¡ Tan ¡ ¡ Tan! Canta el martillo. 

El garrote alzando están. 
Canta en el campo un cuclillo, 

y las estrellas se van 
al compás del estribillo 

con que repica el martillo: 
¡ Tan! ¡ Tan! ¡ Tan! 
El patíbulo destaca 

trágico, nocturno y gris; 
la  ronda de la petaca 

sigue a la ronda del anís; 
pica tabaco la faca, 
y el patíbulo destaca 

sobre el alba flor de lis. 
Áspera copla remota 

que rasguea un guitarrón 
se escucha. Grito de jota 

del morapio peleón. 
El cabileño patriota 

canta la canción remota 
de Las glorias de Aragón. 

Apicarada pelambre 
al pie del garrote vil 

se solaza muerta de hambre. 
Da vayas al alguacil, 

y  con un  rumor de enjambre 
acoge hostil la pelambre 
al a hostil Guardia Civil. 
Un gitano vende churros 
al socaire de un corral; 

asoman flautistas burros 
las orejas al bardal; 

y en el corro de baturros 
El gitano de los churros 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            602      

 

  

It’s turning yellow 
Following the sound of the hammer: 

¡So ¡So! ¡So! 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

beatifica al criminal. 
El reo espera en capilla, 
reza un clérigo en latín, 
llora una vela amarilla, 
y el sentenciado da fin 

a la amarilla tortilla 
de yerbas. Fue a la capilla 

la cena del cafetín. 
Canta en la plaza el martillo, 

el verdugo gana el pan. 
Un paño enluta  el banquillo. 

Como el paño es catalán, 
se está volviendo amarillo 

al son que canta el martillo: 
¡Tan! ¡ Tan! ¡ Tan ¡ 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            603      

 

  

[Index] 

Miguel de Unamuno (1864 - 1936) 
 

 
He was born in Bilbao in 1864. In 1880 he moved to Madrid. He was Doctor in 

Philosophy and Humanities, and he got the chair of Greek at the University of Salamanca. In 
1914 he is dismissed by his politicalactivities. For his opposition to the dictatorship of Primo 
de Rivera he went into exile  to the island of Fuerteventura (Canary Islands)) but when 
Spanish Republic was re-established he recovered his chair in Salamanca again. He was given 
a post held for life as Rector of the University of Salamanca, citizen of honor of the Republic 
and doctor "honoris cause" of the Universities of Oxford and Grenoble. He died in Salamanca 
in 1936. Works: Around the casticismo (En torno al casticismo)(1895)Life of Don Quixote 
and Sancho (Vida de don Quijote y Sancho)(1905), Of the tragic feeling of the life (Del 
sentimiento trágico de la vida) (1912); The Tula aunt (La tía Tula) (1921), Saint Manuel 
Good, martyr (San Manuel Bueno, mártir)(1933) and others, as well as a broad  theatre 
production.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Bilbao. En 1880 se trasladó a Madrid. Doctor en Filosofía y Letras, obtuvo la 
cátedra de griego en la Universidad de Salamanca. En 1914 es destituido por sus 
intervenciones políticas. Por su oposición a la dictadura de Primo de Rivera fue desterrado a 
la isla de Fuerteventura  (Canarias) pero al establecerse de nuevo la República recuperó su 
cátedra en Salamanca. y fue nombrado Rector vitalicio, ciudadano de honor de la República y 
doctor “honoris causa” de las Universidades de Oxford y Grenoble. Murió en Salamanca en 
1936. Obras: En torno al casticismo (1895)Vida de don Quijote y Sancho (1905), Del 
sentimiento trágico de la vida (1912); La tía Tula (1921), San Manuel Bueno, mártir (1933) y 
otras, así como una extensa producción teatral. 
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            604      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Common pain 

 

Dolor común 

 
Be quiet, my heart, they’re your sorrows 
That shouldn’t be told, let them become 

Rotted in  your breast; 
if you suffer from a pain you alone ,  
don’t make it bitter and don’t bother 

the home peace of their homes  
with an unpleasant shout. 

That’s your complaint,  
being as selfish as you’re it reflects 

Only your vanity. 
Never separate your pain  

from the common human pain, 
search that  intimate one  

where settles brotherhood which 
ties you with your brother, 

the one that enlarges the mind  
and doesn’t diminish it : 

solitary and carnal he is always vain; 
only the common pain sanctifies us. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Cállate, corazón, son tus pesares 
de los que no deben decirse, deja 
se pudran en tu seno; si te aqueja 

un dolor de ti solo no acibares 
a los demás la paz de sus hogares 
con inoportuno grito. Esa tu queja, 

siendo egoísta como es, refleja 
tu vanidad no más. Nunca separes 
tu dolor del común dolor humano, 

busca el íntimo aquel en que radica 
la hermandad que te liga con tu hermano, 
el que agranda la mente y no la achica; 

solitario y carnal es siempre vano; 
sólo el dolor común nos santifica. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            605      

 

  

[Index] 

Manuel Machado (1874 - 1947) 
 

 
He was born in Seville but he moved to Madrid with his family in 1883. He studied at 

the Free Institution of Education (Institucion Libre de Esseñanza). He received the master's 
degree in Philosophy and Humanities in Seville. He travelled to Paris and there he knew 
Rubén Darío, and he published his first book: Soul (Alma)(1900). During the Spanish Civil 
War he remained in the national zone. In 1938 he was chosen member of the Royal Spanish 
Academy of Language. He died in Madrid in 1947.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Sevilla, se trasladó con su familia a Madrid en 1883. Cursó estudios en la 
Institución Libre de Enseñanza..Se licenció en Filosofía y Letras en Sevilla. Viajó a París y 
alli conoció a Rubén Darío, y publicó su primer libro: Alma (1900). Durante la Guerra Civil 
permaneció en la zona nacional. En 1938 fue elegido miembro de la Real Academia Española 
de la Lengua. Murió en Madrid en 1947. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            606      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Castile 
 

Castilla 
 

The blind sun crashes  
in the hard edges of the weapons, 

sore of light the bibs and backs 
and blazes the tips of the spears. 

The blind sun, the thirst and the fatigue. 
By the terrible Spanish steppe, 
To  exile, with twelve of them 

dust, sweat and iron-, the Cid rides. 
The inn is closed with stone and mud… 

Nobody responds.  The knob of the sword 
and the story of the magpies, 
the shutter is going to yield…¡ 

The sun burns, the air scorches¡   
The terrible blows, of hoarse echo,  

a pure voice of silver 
and glass responds…there is a girl 

very weak and white in the threshold.   
She has blue eyes and tears in her eyes.. 
Pale gold her curious face and frightened. 
-Good Cid,  pass…The king will not kill you 

It will ruin your house,  
and will sow the poor field  with salt 

which labours my father … 
Go..  The sky fulfil you with fortunes… 

¡In our evil, oh Cid, you do not win anything! 
¡ The girls shuts up and cries without a moan. 

A child sob crosses the squad 
of ferocious warriors, 

and an inflexible voice shouts:  "¡Ahead! 
 

The blind sun, the thirst and the fatigue. 
By the terrible Spanish steppe, 
To exile, with twelve of them 

-dust, sweat and iron-, the Cid rides. 
Translated by:  dabne

 

El ciego sol se estrella 
en las duras aristas de las armas, 
llaga de luz los petos y espaldares 

y flamea en las puntas de las lanzas. 
El ciego sol, la sed y la fatiga. 

Por la terrible estepa castellana, 
al destierro, con doce de los suyos 

-polvo, sudor y hierro- , el Cid cabalga. 
Cerrado está el mesón a piedra y lodo… 
Nadie responde. Al pomo de la espada 

y al cuento de las picas, el postigo 
va a ceder…¡ Quema el sol, el aire abrasa ¡ 

A los terribles golpes, 
de eco ronco, una voz pura, de plata 
y de cristal, responde…Hay una niña 
muy débil y muy blanca en el umbral.  

Es toda ojos azules y en los ojos lágrimas. 
Oro pálido nimba su carita curiosa y asustada. 

-Buen Cid, pasad…El rey nos dará muerte, 
arruinará la casa, 

y sembrará de sal el pobre campo 
que mi padre trabaja… 

Idos. El cielo os colme de venturas… 
¡En nuestro mal, oh Cid, no ganáis nada ¡ 

Calla la niña y llora sin gemido… 
Un sollozo infantil cruza la escuadra 

de feroces guerreros, 
y una voz inflexible grita: “ ¡En marcha!”. 

El ciego sol, la sed y la fatiga. 
Por la terrible estepa castellana, 

al destierro, con doce de los suyos 
-polvo, sudor y hierro-, el Cid cabalga. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            607      

 

  

[Index] 

Juana de Ibarbourou (1895 – 1979) 
 

 
She was born in Melo, Uruguay. Her true name was Juana Fernandez Morales,  

Ibarbourou was the last name of her husband and she adopted this name since her marriage in 
1914. She has a strong human voice, whose native roots have deserved her been called "Juana 
of America". She wrote: The languages of the diamond (Las lenguas del diamante), 1919; 
Wild root (Raíz salvaje), 1920; The wind rose, (La rosa de los vientos) 1930. In 1947 she 
entered the Uruguayan Academy and in 1959, she was awarded with the National Prize of 
Spanish Literature.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació en Melo, Uruguay. Su verdadero nombre era Juana Fernández Morales. 
Ibarbourou, era el apellido de su marido y lo adoptó a partir de su matrimonio en 1914. Posee 
una fuerte voz humana, cuyas raíces autóctonas le han valido el apelativo de “ Juana de 
América”. Escribe: Las lenguas del diamante, 1919; Raíz salvaje, 1920; La rosa de los 
vientos, 1930. En 1947 ingresó en la Academia uruguaya y en 1959, recibió el Premio 
Nacional de Literatura española. 
 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            608      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The strong tie 

 

El fuerte lazo 
I grew for you.   

Cut me down. My acacia. 
implore your hands a strike of grace. 

I bloomed 
for you 

Cut me down.  My lily 
When I was born I doubted if flower or candle. 

I flowed 
for you. 

Drink myself. The glass 
envies the clear flow of my spring.. 

I gave wings 
For you 

Hunt me down. Moth 
I surrounded your flame of full impatience. 

For you I will suffer ¡ 
Blessed be the damage 

your love gives me! 
Blessed be the axe, blessed the network, 

and praised be scissors and thirst! 
Blood of the ribs 

will flow, my beloved 
What a beautiful, clasp ,what a pleasing jewel, 

for you a sore scarlet colour? 
Instead of glass beads for my hair 

I will plunge seven long thorns among them.. 
And instead of earrings I will put in my ears, 

Like two rubies, two red hot coals. 
You will see me laugh 

seeing me suffer. 
And you will cry. 

And then. ..¡ You will be more mine than ever.! 
Translated by:  dabne

 

Crecí 
para ti. 

Tálame . Mi acacia 
implora a tus manos ungolpe de gracia. 

Florí 
para ti 

Córtame,. Mi lirio 
al nacer dudaba ser flor o ser cirio. 

Fluí 
para ti. 

Bébeme. El cristal 
envidia lo claro de mi manantial.. 

Alas di 
por ti. 

Cázame. Falena, 
rodeé tu llama de impaciencia llena. 

Por ti sufriré 
¡ Bendito sea el daño  
que tu amor me dé! 

¡ Bendita sea el hacha, bendita la red, 
y loadas sean tijeras y sed! 

Sangre del costado 
manaré, mi amado. 

¿ Qué broche mas bello, qué joya más grata, 
que por ti una llaga color escarlata? 

En vez de abalorios para mis cabellos 
siete espinas largas hundiré entre ellos. 

Y en vez de zarcillos pondré en mis orejas, 
como dos rubíes, dos ascuas bermejas. 

Me verás reir 
viéndome sufrir. 

Y tú llorarás . 
Y entonces...¡ Más mío que nunca serás! 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            609      

 

  

[Index] 

Amado Nervo (1870 – 1919) 
 

 
A Mexican poet, he was born in Tepic, Nayarite in 1870. In his youth he wanted to be 

clergyman, but very soon he was attracted by several stimuli of life, the trips, love and the 
poetry itself. Its aesthetic start was marked by the influence of Gutiérrez Nájera and the 
groups which gathered "The blue magazine" (La Revista Azul) and "Modern Magazine" 
(Revista Moderna), whose pages overflowed all the ardour of the American modernism. 
Among the set of his creative work  it stands out Serenity (Serenidad); Elevation (Elevación), 
Fullness (Plenitud) and The immovable loved one (La amada inmóvil). 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Poeta mexicano nacido en Tepic, Nayarit en 1870. En su juventud quiso ser clérigo, 
pero muy pronto se vio atraído por los variados estímulos de la vida, los viajes, los amores y 
la misma poesía. Su iniciación estética fue marcada por el influjo de Gutiérrez Nájera y de los 
grupos que se congregaban alrededor de «La revista azul» y «Revista moderna», en cuyas 
páginas se desbordaba todo el ímpetu del modernismo americano. Entre el conjunto de su 
creación, se destacan sus libros Serenidad; Elevación, Plenitud y La amada inmóvil. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            610      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Ródeuse 

 

Ródeuse 

 
If they find you thoughtful the disasters of the leaves 

Which fly around crackling along the boulevard; 
If the north winds  show you I do not know what vague grieves 

And inexact nostalgias and will to cry; 
 

if the luminous beating of the stars make you feel cold; 
If you see undoubtly sad the river Seine slipping, 
And the reflection of the scarlet lights on the river 
You  fancy that is the wake of some tragic ship 

where the attorneys of the Morgue carry drowned people to 
bury, 

 
¡Poor Girl!! Come with me: leave the barren bridges yet. 

There is a hostile soul in these nights towards consumptives, 
and a vampire disguised of gallon who seeks ill women, 

Who makes the court to the ones who cough when asleep, 
And who will suck through filthy horn your nipples of ivory. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Si te toman pensativa los desastres de las hojas 
que revuelan crepitando por el amplio bulevar; 

si los cierzos te insinúan no sé qué vagas congojas 
y nostalgias imprecisas y deseos de llorar; 

 
si el latido luminoso de los astros te da frío; 

si incurablemente triste ves al Sena resbalar, 
y el reflejo de los focos escarlatas sobre el río 

se te antoja que es la estela de algún trágico navío 
donde llevan los ahogados de la Morgue a sepultar; 

 
¡Pobrecita! ven conmigo: deja ya las puentes yermas. 

Hay un alma en estas noches a las tísicas hostil, 
y un vampiro disfrazado de galón que busca enfermas, 

que corteja a las que tosen y que, a poco que te duermas, 
chupará con trompa inmunda tus pezones de marfil. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            611      

 

  

[Index] 

Guillermo Valencia (1873 - 1943) 
 

 
He was a poet and politician caucano (Colombia). From the classic culture it arose his 

poetic tendency called parnasianismo, which lead the old Greek and Latin writers. Soon it 
came the influence of French Literature which draw his imagination towards the symbolism 
and, finally, under literary influence of Rubén Darío, whom he knew and who was his friend, 
was the modernism. He was an author of a single book, Rites (Ritos) (1889)  a personal poet 
who contributes to a sense of poetic concentration and a spirit of protest for the social 
injustice. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Poeta y político caucano (Colombia). De la cultura clásica surgió su primera tendencia 
poética, denominada parnasianismo, que encabezan los antiguos escritores griegos y latinos. 
Luego vino la influencia de la literatura francesa, que orientó su imaginación hacia el 
simbolismo y, finalmente, bajo la influencia literaria de Rubén Darío, a quien conoció y de 
quien fue amigo, sería el modernismo. Autor de un solo libro, Ritos (1889) es un poeta 
personalísimo que aporta un sentido de la concentración poética y un espíritu de protesta por 
la injusticia social. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            612      

 

  

[Index] 
 

The word of god 
(Synthesis) 

 

La palabra de dios 
(Síntesis) 

 

When it saw my poem Jonatás the Rabbi 
(the spirit and flesh of the biblical science), 

with a laugh in the lips he explained me the sentence 
of whom has freed the Dove on the divine Text. 
Never taste, he told me, of the femenine liquor, 

Which is a liquor of mandragoras and distils dementia; 
If you drink it, exactly your conscience will die, 

your songs will fly, you will err the way. 
And he added:  What you are going to hear now don’t get 

astonished: 
The woman is the old enemy of the man; 
Her hairs of flame are comets of fright. 

She frees the land from the vicious lover, 
and She calms her anguish of her thirst of rest 

with the juice that pours the wounds of the saint. 
 

Decadence 
 

In the paternal wall, condemned 
From miserly oblivion to the mute revenge, 

To the dusty cord which ties her 
it is entangled the abandoned   panoply . 

A Long rest made the sword  drowsy 
and the old helmet of coarse top ; 

smoothens the time the dagger that, naked, 
stopped the champion of temple mane. 

¡It passed the noble lineage!  The puny son 
exchanges for stables what was stockade, 

the leaves of Damascus in roasters, 
and he looks impassive - thus  he couldn’t fight- 

The dented shield fall broken 
From the urine to the victorious cuts! 

Translated by:  dabne

 

Cuando vio mi poema Jonatás el Rabino 
(el espíritu y carne de la bíblica ciencia), 

con la risa en los labios me explicó la sentencia 
que soltó la Paloma sobre el Texto divino. 

Nunca pruebes, me dijo, del licor femenino, 
que es licor de mandrágoras y destila demencia; 

si lo bebes, al punto morirá tu conciencia, 
volarán tus canciones, errarás el camino. 

Y agregó: Lo que ahora vas a oír no te asombre: 
la mujer es el viejo enemigo del hombre; 

sus cabellos de llama son cometas de espanto. 
Ella libra la tierra del amante vicioso, 

y Ella calma la angustia de su sed de reposo 
con el jugo que vierten las heridas del santo. 

 

Decadencia  
 

En el paterno muro, condenada  
de avaro olvido a la venganza muda,   
al cordón polvoriento que la anuda   
se enreda la panoplia abandonada.  
Largo reposo aletargó la espada   
y el casco viejo de cimera ruda;   

lima el tiempo la daga que, desnuda,   
contuvo al paladín de sien crinada.  

¡Pasó la noble estirpe! ¡El hijo enclenque  
trueca en establos lo que fué palenque,  

las hojas de Damasco en asadores,  
y ve impasible - pues luchar no pudo -  

caer deshecho el abollado escudo  
del orín a los tajos vencedores! 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            613      

 

  

[Index] 

Delmira Agustini (1886 – 1914 ) 
 

 
She was born in Montevideo, (Uruguay), in 1886, she belonged to a rich family. She 

dazzled with her verse books White Book (Libro blanco), 1907; Songs to the morning (Cantos 
a la mañana), 1910 and The empty chalices (Los cálices vacíos), 1913. She died in 1914, 
murdered by his husband to whom she had married in 1913.  
 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nació  en Montevideo, (Uruguay), en 1886, de un familia rica. Deslumbró en Buenos 
Aires con sus libros de versos Libro blanco, 1907; Cantos a la mañana, 1910 y  Los cálices 
vacíos, 1913. Murió en 1914, asesinada por su marido con el que había contraído matrimonio 
en 1913. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            614      

 

  

[Index] 
 

On a candid tomb 

 

Sobre una tumba cándida 

 
"He  has died... has died. ..”, they say so clear that I can’t 

understand... 
¡ Pouring such  smooth liquor in such tremendous glass! ... 

Perhaps it was a strange evil your look  for divine, 
your soul for heaven, or your profile for fine... 

Perhaps there were your arms two buds of wings... 
¡There were a sky when you pass the gardens, the rooms, 

and you appeared in the world sweet as a dead person! 
Perhaps your window remained one night opened. 

¡ Oh, temptation of wings, an open window! ... 
And an Angel seduced you for the purest star.... 
And your wings opened, and they cut the height 

in snips of light and of innocence! 
And in the bedroom which your soul upholstered of ermine, 

where the glasses burned  of roses of affection, 
the Solitude called in silence for Horror. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
“Ha muerto... ha muerto...”, dicen tan claro que no 

entiendo... 
¡ Verter licor tan suave en vaso tan tremendo!... 
Tal vez fue un mal extraño tu mirar por divino, 

tu alma por celeste, o tu perfil por fino... 
Tal vez fueron tus brazos dos capullos de alas ... 

¡ Eran cielo a tu paso los jardines, las salas, 
y te asomaste al mundo dulce como una muerta! 

Acaso tu ventana quedó una noche abierta. 
_ ¡ Oh, tentación de  alas , una ventana abierta!... 
¡ Y te sedujo un ángel por la estrella más pura... 

Y tus alas se abrieron , y cortaron la altura 
en un tijeretazo de luz y de candor! 

Y en la alcoba que tu alma tapizaba de armiño, 
donde ardían los vasos de rosas de cariño, 
la Soledad llamaba en silencio al  Horror ... 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            615      

 

  

[Index] 

Luís Alfonso Díez  (1953) 
 

 
He is a poet, professor and translator, born in Zamora and living in Madrid. Author of 

several verse books with rich and diverse metric technique: Embassies of the sunset 
(Embajadas del ocaso); Seventy and nine sonnets (Setenta y nueve sonetos) (1996); Aloof 
cutting (Esquivo esqueje) (1997) and Album of vaguenesses (Álbum de vaguedades), (2002). 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Poeta, profesor y traductor  zamorano residente en Madrid.  Autor de varios poemarios 
con rica y diversa técnica versificatoria y métrica : Embajadas del ocaso;  Setenta y nueve 
sonetos (1996); Esquivo esqueje, (1997) y Álbum de vaguedades, (2002). 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            616      

 

  

[Index] 
 

Of the neighbourhoods of Lavapiés, 
today 

 

Del barrio de Lavapiés, hoy 

 
A neighbourhood of today of rabble and delight 

this which  was before of menestrales 
honest artisans, or that’s what they say say.  It klaxons 

now the old kettledrums. 
 

And shouts of manolasat sight. 
They were carried off the time 

the genuine native neighbour , and of the majeo 
It only remains summer pastiches. 

 
Of those organized by City Hall. 

There is in all very few courtesies: 
in the híspida half-light of the bars, 

 
Merchants with jackets and with bags under their  eyes 

They  execute their juggling games 
while death passes by  its scissors. 

 
Translated by:  dabne

 

 
Un barrio hoy de canalla y regodeo 

este que antes lo fue de menestrales 
honrados, o eso dicen. Claxoneo 

ahora los antiguos atabales 
 

y gritos de manolas al oteo. 
Se llevaron del tiempo vendavales 
las poses del castizo, y del majeo 
sólo quedan pastiches estivales 

 
de esos que montan los Ayuntamientos. 

Hay en todo muy pocos miramientos: 
en la híspida penumbra de los bares, 

 
mercaderes con chupa y con ojeras 

ejecutan sus juegos malabares 
mientras pasa la muerte sus tijeras. 

 

[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            617      

 

  

[Index] 

Agustín García Calvo (1926) 
 

 
He was born in Zamora in 1926, he was an University professor of Latin Philology in 

Seville and later in Madrid. In 1965 he was expelled from his chair in   the Complutensian 
University with other university professors. As a result he went into exile in Paris in 1969. In 
1976, after his return to Spain, he was given back his chair. He counts with a widen 
production of songs and poems among which stand out Songs and soliloquies (Canciones y 
soliloquios)(1976) Of the train (Del tren) (1976) Book of spells (Libro de conjuros) (1979) 
Valorio 42 times (Valorio 42 veces)(1986) as well as many plays, tests, and editions critics 
and rhythmical versions of Greek and Latin classic authors. 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 
 

Nacido en Zamora en 1926, fue Catedrático de Filología Latina en Sevilla y 
posteriormente en Madrid. En 1965 fue expulsado de su cátedra en la Universidad 
Complutense junto con otros catedráticos y profesores. A raíz de este hecho se exilió en París 
en 1969. En 1976, tras su regreso a España, fue repuesto en su cátedra. Cuenta con una 
amplísima producción de canciones y poemas de los que destacamos Canciones y soliloquios 
(1976) Del tren (1976) Libro de conjuros (1979) Valorio 42 veces (1986) así como numerosas 
obras de teatro, ensayos, y  ediciones críticas y versiones rítmica de autores clásicos griegos y 
latinos. 
 

 [Index] [Spanish Poets] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            618      

 

  

[Index] 
 

A song of 
"Songs and Soliloquies" 

 

Una canción  
de "Canciones y soliloquios” 

 
When you see the banking worker 

serious and dynamic 
Who introduces the key in the groove of his car, 

while he speaks with an important client, 
and with a firm hand 

he seizes the steering wheel, 
you will see, if you pay attention , in the glass 

the face of one who knows. 
In the school, at the break time 

To the courtyard pushing each other 
if you see some one called 

the Capacobardes 
who spits the foolish in the ear 

of the class 
and stares awaiting 

 
the other to set off, 

ice creams of glass you will see there 
the eyes of the one who knows. 

Or if you see through the muddy window 
In front your  lover 

The concubine who, already skinny, 
Grasps the  corpse 

of his love, and  with a knife says "As you may escape, 
I swear you, right here 

I cut  my throat” 
You will see engraved in the white skin 

the sign of the one who knows. 
In the photo of the head of state 

Which fixes the instant 
in which he, seated in front of a   decree 

of death of someone, 
in arduous pain the pen 

 
Cuando veas al hombre de banca 

dinámico y grave 
que en la ranura de su coche 

introduce la llave, 
mientras habla con un cliente 

importante, 
y con mano segura 
agarra el volante, 

verás, si te fijas, en el cristal 
la cara del que sabe. 

 
En la escuela, al salir de recreo 

al patio empujándose, 
si ves a uno que lo llaman 

el Capacobardes 
que le escupe en la oreja al tonto 

de la clase 
y se planta aguardando 
que el otro se arranque, 

helados de vidrio verás allí 
los ojos del que sabe. 

 
O si ves por la turbia ventana 

de frente a su amante 
a la querida que, ya seca, 

se aferra al cadáver 
de su amor, y a cuchillo dice 

«Como escapes, 
te lo juro, aquí mismo 
me siego el gaznate», 

grabado verás en la blanca piel 
el signo del que sabe. 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            619      

 

  

of gold he waves, 
when he signs the signature 

of a line he draws it, 
drawn in his front you can see it 
the mark of the one who knows. 

Or if not, in the neon of the mirror 
 

of the bar 'My darling' 
if you see the pimp who says to his blonde 
smoking his nose, "That no, no little baby, 

that your father, 
and be careful with the mascara, 

which will dry” 
settled on his eyelids you will see her 

the force of the one who.knows. 
And if you appear, at last, in the  studio 

of high glasses 
where the brain of  enterprise 

draws the plans 
of the future road, and runs 

straight the pencil 
and right and with a ruler 

erases the trees, 
guided you will see it upright 

the hand of the one who knows. 
All they have their idea: they are 

they the kings of the air. 
And if you see that, when all 

Are imprisoned 
in the jail of the verses and that the music 

already puts off, 
I remain looking at the clouds 

 
In the distance 

Remind me and tell me: "I see there 
the face of the one who knows". 

 
Translated by:  dabne

En la foto del jefe de estado 
que fija el istante 

en que él, sentado ante un decreto 
de muerte de alguien, 

en penoso deber la pluma 
de oro blande, 

cuando firme la firma 
de un trazo la trace, 

trazada en su frente la puedes ver 
la marca del que sabe. 

 
O si no, en el neón del espejo 

del bar de 'My darling' 
si ves al chulo que a su rubia 

le dice, fumándole 
de nariz, «Que nanay, nenita, 

que tu padre, 
y cuidao con el rímel, 

que no se te empaste», 
posada en sus párpados la verás 

la fuerza del que sabe. 
 

Y si asomas, en fin, al estudio 
de altos cristales 

donde el cerebro de la empresa 
dibuja los planes 

de la ruta futura, y corre 
recto el lápiz 

y a derecho y a regla 
los borra los árboles, 

guiada verás de la pura ley 
la mano del que sabe. 

 
Todos tienen su idea: son ellos 

los reyes del aire. 
Y si tú ves que, cuando a todos 

los cierre en la cárcel 
de los versos y que la música 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            620      

 

  

 ya se apague, 
yo me quedo a las nubes 

mirando distante, 
recuérdame y dime «La veo ahí 

la cara del que sabe». 

 
[Index] [Spanish Poets] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            621      

 

  

 [Index] 

 

Acknowledgements  [Greek]  [Italian]  [Lithuanian]  [Spanish]  
 
 

It would be wrong to pretend that a work like this is just a product of one or two 
people, especially when the content is covering the European continent. We are particularly 
grateful to people around Europe that collected and selected the information for this electronic 
book and managed to electronically publish after a three year collaborative work. 

   
We would particularly like to thank Mrs. Pilar Cataño from Aldesoc that was the 

coordinator of this project. We would also wish to thank all of whom provided their time and 
expertise for the project, freely and enthusiastically: Mrs. Carolina Garcia, Prof. Roberto 
Garcia Tomé, Mrs. Maria Teresa Pérez Bouza, Mrs Zulima González García from Aldesoc, 
Mrs. Anna Maria Rossi, Mrs. Paola Novellini, Mrs. Lucilla Crosta, Mr. Leandro Morelli, Mr. 
Alberto Rigoldi from Kelidon, Mrs. Norma Patelli, Mrs. Elena Paltrinieri, Mrs. Sandra 
Anceschi,  from Carpiformazione, Mrs. Inga Jagelaviciute, Mrs. Indre Adomaitiene, Mrs. 
Kristina Martinaviciute, Mr. Gintaras Jurkevicius from Vilnius Gabriele Petkevicaite – Bite 
AEC, Mr Sofoklis Charalambides, Mr. Stelios Georgiou, Mrs. Antonia Loizou, Mrs. 
Margarita Charalambidou, Mrs. Eleni Georgiou, Mrs. Adriana Georgiou,  Mr. Michalis 
Ioannou from Adult Educational Centres, Mr. Vassilis Sakkas Mr. Xenofon Strimpis, Mrs. 
Eleni Kaltsa, Mr. Christos Ntalianis, Mrs. Sofia Katopodi, Mrs. Vassiliki Tavla, Mr. Manolis 
Kessoglou, Mr. Ioannis Papalambros, Mr. Thanassis Theodosiou, Mr. Panagiotis 
Karampogias from Union of IT Scientists of Viotia. 

  
Special mention should be given to our associated partners from Dokuz Eylul 

University Mr. Bulent Cavas, Mr. Ali Balim Gunay, Mr. Teoman Kesercioglu, Mr. Metin 
Bulus, Mrs.Duygu Seyman for their excellent collaboration in the partnership and their 
contributed sample work can be reached at http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip

 
However, particular thanks to our families that supported us and encouraged us for the 

past three years. 
  
Lastly, we thank of course the European Commission for their financial support 

enabled the project to be carried out. 

[Index] 

http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            622      

 

  

[Index] 

Bibliography 
 
[1] Χρ. Ανδρέου, 1986, Ανθολογία Κυπριακής Λογοτεχνίας, τόμοι Α, Β, Γ ποίηση, Λευκωσία 

1986,εκδόσεις  

[2]  Literary profiles, 1993/1994/1995,1 –40, Cyprus Pen Publications, Nicosia  
[3] Θεοδούλου,Μετάφραση Ιρένας Ιωαννίδου, 2006, Η Ευρώπη στην Κυπριακή Ποίηση, 

Ανθολόγηση Μόνας Σαββίδου-, Λευκωσία  

[4] Ζυμπουλάκη Στέφανου, 1996, «Ερωτικά της Εύης», Λάρνακα  
[5] Zimboulakis Stefanos, 1996, Erotika, Erotic poems for Eve, Larnaca. 
[6] Μολέσκη Γιώργου , συλλογή «Ποιήματα», 
[7] Κράλη Μάνου, «Τα ποιήματα (1936 – 1984), 
[8] Παταπίου Νάσα, «Το φωνήεν σώμα», ποιήματα, εκδόσεις Καστανιώτη 
[9] Παιονίδου Έλλη, «Διαδρομές», εκδόσεις Ιωλκός 
[10] Κουγιάλη Θεοκλή, 1959 – 1989, 30 χρόνια ποίηση, Λευκωσία 1994 
[11] Γιώργος Κιτρομηλίδης, 2007, Κερύνεια, Ανθολόγηση ποιημάτων, Λευκωσία. 
[12] Λαδάκη Φιλίππου Νίκη, 1994, Τριάντα και δύο χρόνια ΔΡΟΜΟΙ ΑΓΑΠΗΣ, Λευκωσία. 
[13] Αγγελίδου Κλαίρη, Πότνια Αλς, 
[14] Ιωαννίδου – Σταύρου Ρούλα, τρεις ποιητικές συνθέσεις για την Κύπρο, Έκδοση  

Ελληνικού Πνευματικού Ομίλου Κύπρου 

[15] Μιχαηλίδη Βασίλη, 1972, Ποιήματα, Κύπρος, Νοέμβριος  1972 
[16] Παναγιώτου Παπαονησιφόρου Μυριάνθη, Της Γης μου οι Αντίλαλοι, ποιήματα 
[17] Friar K., 1995, Modern Greek Poetry, Efstathiades Group S.A., Athens 
[18] Raizis M.B., 1981, Greek Poetry Translations, Efstathiades Group S.A., Athens 
[19] Friar K., 1985, Contemporary Greek Poetry, The Greek Ministry of Culture, Athens 
[20] Ambrosoli L., 1967, Tutte le opere di Carlo Cattaneo, Mondadori, Milano. 
[21] Armellini G., Colombo A., 1999, La letteratura italiana, Zanichelli, Bologna. 
[22] Binni W., 1982, Ugo Foscolo, storia e poesia, Einaudi, Torino. 
[23] Botta N., 1998, Il viaggiatore senza bagaglio: percorsi nella letteratura e nell'arte, 

Loescher, Città di castello (Pg). 

[24] Carducci G., 1961, Rime nuove, comment by Trompeo P.P.and Salinari G.B., Zanichelli, 
Bologna. 

[25] Carducci G., 1942, Poesie, Zanichelli, Bologna.. 
[26] Cattaneo C., 1972, Opere scelte, comment by Castelnuovo Frigessi D., Einaudi, Torino. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            623      

 

  

[27] D'Annunzio G., 1982, Versi d'amore e di gloria, comment by Andreoli A. and Lorenzini 
N., Mondadori, Milano. 

[28] De Amicis E., 1945, Cuore, Garzanti, Milano. 
[29] De Amicis E., 1972, Cuore, comment by Tamburini L., Einaudi, Torino. 
[30] Deledda G., 1941-1969, Romanzi e novelle, Mondadori, Milano. 
[31] Dini F., 2002, I Macchiaioli, Polistampa, Firenze. 
[32] Dini F., Spalletti E.,  1996, Dai Macchiaioli agli Impressionisti, Polistampa, Firenze. 
[33] Foscolo U., 1974, Opere, comment by Gavazzeni F., Ricciardi, Milano. 
[34] Gozzano G., 1980, Tutte le poesie, comment by Rocca A., Mondadori, Milano. 
[35] Guglielmino S., Scarduelli Silvestrini T., 1980, Guida alla lettura, Principato, Milano. 
[36] Illuminati A., 1967, La rivoluzione, Sampietro, Bologna.. 
[37] Leopardi G., 1969, Tutte le opere, comment by Binni W. and Ghidetti E., Sansoni, 

Firenze. 

[38] Leopardi G., 1960, Canti comment by De Robertis G., Le Monnier, Firenze. 
[39] Luzi M., 1988, Tutte le poesie, Garzanti, Milano. 
[40] Manzoni A., 1973, Opere, comment by Caretti L., Mursia, Milano. 
[41] Marinetti F.T., 1968, Teoria e Invenzione Futurista,comment by De Maria L., 

Mondadori, Milano. 

[42] Mazzini G., 1961, Critici dell'età romantica, comment by Cappuccio C., UTET, Torino. 
[43] Mengaldo P.N., 1978, Poeti italiani del Novecento, Mondadori, Milano. 
[44] Montale E., 1984, Tutte le poesie, a cura di Zampa G., Mondadori, Milano. 
[45] Montale E., 1980, L'opera in versi, Einaudi, Torino. 
[46] Monti R., 2000, I Macchiaioli, Giunti, Firenze. 
[47] Nievo I., 1952, Opere, comment by Romagnoli S., Ricciardi, Milano. 
[48] Ottolini G., Baiocchetti M., Cortesi M., 2000, Orsa Minore. Navigare nella poesia, La 

Nuova Italia, Firenze. 

[49] Palazzeschi A., 2001, Poesie, comment by Dei A., Mondadori, Milano. 
[50] Pascoli G., 2001, Tutte le poesie, comment by Colasanti A., Newton Compton, Roma. 
[51] Pavese C., 1968, Opere, Einaudi, Torino. 
[52] Penna S., 1989, Poesie, Garzanti, Milano. 
[53] Quasimodo S., 1971, Poesie e discorsi sulla poesia, comment by Finzi G., Mondadori, 

Milano. 

[54] Saba U., 1988, Tutte le poesie, comment by Stara A., Mondadori, Milano. 
[55] Saba U., 1961, Il canzoniere, Einaudi, Torino. 
[56] Sereni V., 1986, Tutte le poesie, Mondadori, Milano. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            624      

 

  

[57] Silone I., 1998, Romanzi e saggi, a cura di Falcetto B., Mondadori, Milano. 
[58] Tomasi Di Lampedusa G., 1991, Il gattopardo, Feltrinelli, Milano. 
[59] Ungaretti G., 1969, Via d'un uomo. Tutte le poesie, comment by Piccioni L., Mondadori, 

Milano. 

[60] Verga G., 1955, Opere, comment by Russo L., Ricciardi, Milano. 
[61] Villari P., 1972, Storia dell'Europa contemporanea, Laterza, Bari. 
[62] Vittorini E., 1988, Conversazione in Sicilia, Rizzoli, Milano. 
[63] Vittorini E., 1966, Conversazione in Sicilia, Einaudi, Torino. 
[64] Iešmantaitė A., 2002, Lietuvių poezija mokyklai, Saulabrolis, Vilnius 
[65] Lietuvių literatūros enciklopedija, 2001, Lietuvių literatūros ir tautosakos institutas, AB 

Vilspa, Vilnius 

[66] Lietuvių literatūros istorija XIX amžius, 2001, Lietuvių literatūros ir tautosakos 
institutas, AB Vilspa, Vilnius 

[67] Zaborskaitė V., 2001, Trumpa lietuvių literatūros istorija, I dalis, Baltos lankos, Vilnius 
[68] Zaborskaitė V., 2002, Trumpa lietuvių literatūros istorija, II dalis, Baltos lankos, 

Vilnius 

[69] Pažūsis L., 1989, Songs of life and love. Five Lithuanian Poets Selected Poems, Vaga, 
Vilnius 

[70] http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/17/tekstas/1.html (06/11/2006) 
[71] http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/23/tekstas/1.html#isnyksiu (06/11/2006) 
[72] http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/50/tekstas/01.html (06/11/2006) 
[73] http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/36/tekstas/02.html#zemei (31/10/2006) 
[74] http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vincas_Kudirka#Biografija (27/11/2006) 
[75] http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lietuvos_himnas (27/11/2006) 
[76] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/aistis.html (18/10/2006) 
[77] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/baltrusaitis.html (06/11/2006) 
[78] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/bloze.html (18/10/2006) 
[79] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/brazdzionis.html (25/10/2006) 
[80] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/kirsa.html (06/11/2006) 
[81] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/macernis.html (06/11/2006) 
[82] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/mackus.html (08/11/2006) 
[83] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/martinaitis.html (30/10/2006) 
[84] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/miezelaitis.html (06/11/2006) 
[85] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/putinas.html (31/10/2006) 
[86] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/radauskas.html (06/11/2006) 

http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/17/tekstas/1.html
http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/23/tekstas/1.html#isnyksiu
http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/50/tekstas/01.html
http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/36/tekstas/02.html#zemei
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vincas_Kudirka#Biografija
http://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lietuvos_himnas
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/aistis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/baltrusaitis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/bloze.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/brazdzionis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/kirsa.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/macernis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/mackus.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/martinaitis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/miezelaitis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/putinas.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/radauskas.html


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            625      

 

  

[87] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/rastenis.html (08/11/2006) 
[88] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/sruoga.html (06/11/2006) 
[89] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/sirvys.html (15/10/2006) 
[90] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/tysliava.html (26/11/2006) 
[91] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/vaicaitis.html (10/25/2006) 
[92] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/venclova.html (26/11/2006) 
[93] http://www.efn.org/~valdas/vaiciunaite.html (07/11/2006) 
[94] http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/images/gallery/small/algima

ntas_baltakis.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/index.php/fuseaction,writers.view%3B
id,251&h=70&w=50&sz=3&hl=lt&start=7&tbnid=yXDpUsDfpbVGSM:&tbnh=68&tb
nw=49&p (15/10/2006) 

[95] http://poezija.sdf-eu.org/baltrus.html (06/11/2006) 
[96] http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/57/autor.html (20/10/2006) 
[97] http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/54/autor.html (08/11/2006) 
[98] http://www.baltrusaitis.lt/Default.aspx?Element=I_Manager2&TopicID=26&IMAction

=ViewArticles (18/10/2006) 

[99] http://www.booksfromlithuania.lt/index.php?page_id=3&action=info&WriterID=36 
(18/10/2006) 

[100] http://www.xxiamzius.lt/numeriai/2004/06/30/foto/3-46.jpg (18/10/2006) 
[101] http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/lt/6/66/Antanas_Baranauskas.jpg (25/11/2007) 
[102] Alberti, R.,  Poesías completas, Buenos Aires, Losada, 1958. 
[103] Alberti, R.,  Poesía (1924 - 1967) de R. Alberti Madrid, Aguilar.  
[104] Alberti, R.,  Antología Poética, Madrid, Alianza, 1980. 
[105] Alonso Cortés, Narciso.,  Las cien mejores poesias delsiglo XIX, Madrid, Afrodisio 

Aguado, 1956. 

[106] Agustini, Delmira,  Obras completas, Barcelona, Labor, 1971. 
[107] Aleixandre, V.,: Obras completas, 2 vol. Madrid Aguilar. . 
[108] Aleixandre, V.,:Antología poética, Madrid Alianza, 2003..  
[109] Aleixandre, V.,:Pasión de la tierra, Madrid , Adonais, 1946.  
[110] Aleixandre, V.,:Historia del corazón, Madrid, Espasa – Calpe, 1954. 
[111] Becquer, G. A.,: Libro de los gorriones: Madrid, Cupsa, 1977. 
[112] Becquer, G. A., Rimas, Madrid, Cátedra; 1995. 
[113] Becquer, G. A., Rimas y otros poemas, Madrid : Ediciones Orbis., 1997 
[114] Castro, Rosalia, Obras completas, Madrid Aguilar.  
[115] Castro, Rosalia, Cantares gallegos, Madrid, Cátedra., col. Letras hispánicas. 1989. 

http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/rastenis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/sruoga.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/sirvys.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/tysliava.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/vaicaitis.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/venclova.html
http://www.efn.org/%7Evaldas/vaiciunaite.html
http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/images/gallery/small/algimantas_baltakis.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/index.php/fuseaction,writers.view%3Bid,251&h=70&w=50&sz=3&hl=lt&start=7&tbnid=yXDpUsDfpbVGSM:&tbnh=68&tbnw=49&p
http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/images/gallery/small/algimantas_baltakis.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/index.php/fuseaction,writers.view%3Bid,251&h=70&w=50&sz=3&hl=lt&start=7&tbnid=yXDpUsDfpbVGSM:&tbnh=68&tbnw=49&p
http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/images/gallery/small/algimantas_baltakis.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/index.php/fuseaction,writers.view%3Bid,251&h=70&w=50&sz=3&hl=lt&start=7&tbnid=yXDpUsDfpbVGSM:&tbnh=68&tbnw=49&p
http://images.google.lt/imgres?imgurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/images/gallery/small/algimantas_baltakis.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.rasyk.lt/index.php/fuseaction,writers.view%3Bid,251&h=70&w=50&sz=3&hl=lt&start=7&tbnid=yXDpUsDfpbVGSM:&tbnh=68&tbnw=49&p
http://poezija.sdf-eu.org/baltrus.html
http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/57/autor.html
http://anthology.lms.lt/texts/54/autor.html
http://www.baltrusaitis.lt/Default.aspx?Element=I_Manager2&TopicID=26&IMAction=ViewArticles
http://www.baltrusaitis.lt/Default.aspx?Element=I_Manager2&TopicID=26&IMAction=ViewArticles
http://www.booksfromlithuania.lt/index.php?page_id=3&action=info&WriterID=36
http://www.xxiamzius.lt/numeriai/2004/06/30/foto/3-46.jpg
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/lt/6/66/Antanas_Baranauskas.jpg


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            626      

 

  

[116] Castro, Rosalia, En las orillas del Sar, Madrid Castalia. 2002. 
[117] Celaya, G., Poesías completas, Madrid, Visor Libros, 2007. 
[118] Celaya, G., Itinerario poético, Madrid, Cátedra, 1989. 
[119] Cohen, J.M.,  The Penguin Book of Spanish verse, Londres, Penguin Book, 1954 
[120] Cossio; Jose Maria de,..Cincuenta años de poesia española (1850-1900), Madrid, 

Espasa Calpe, 1960 

[121] Díaz Mirón, S.,: Los mejores poemas de Salvador Díaz Mirón ,Ed. América. 
[122] Díaz Mirón, S.,: Poesías completas (1876 –1928). 
[123] Espronceda, J., Obras completas, Madrid, Cátedra, 2006. 
[124] Espronceda, J., El diablo mundo, Madrid, Cátedra, 1992. 
[125] Espronceda, J., El estudiante de Salamanca, Madrid, Cátedra, 1989. 
[126] Felipe, L., Obras completas: Buenos Aires , Losada.. 
[127] Felipe, L., Obra poética escogida, Madrid Espasa – Calpe, 1980. 
[128] Felipe, L., Versos y oraciones de caminante, Madrid, Alambra 1979. 
[129] Guillén, J., Aire nuestro. I : Cántico .II Clamor. III: Homenaje. IV: Y otros poemas 

Barcelona Barral 1977. 

[130] Guillén, J., Selección de poemas  Madrid, Gredos 1984. 
[131] Guillen, N.,  Summa poética, Madrid – Cátedra, 1986. 
[132] Guillen, N.,  Sóngoro Cosongoy otros poemas, Madrid, Alianza, 2002. 
[133] Herrera y Reissig, J.,  Poesías completas y páginas en prosa Madrid, Aguilar, 1961. 
[134] Herrera y Reissig, J.,  Poesías, selec. de   M. J.. Álvarez Rodríguez, Montevideo. 
[135] Ibarbourou, Juana de,: Obras completas, Madrid , Aguilar, 1968. 
[136] Ibarbourou, Juana de, Antología poética, Madrid, Cultura Hispánica. 
[137] Icaza, F. A. de,: Lejanías 1899.  
[138] Icaza, F. A. de,: Canciones de la vida honda y de la emoción fugitiva 1922. 
[139] Jiménez, J, R., Trescientos poemas, Barcelona, Plaza y Janés.  
[140] Jiménez, J, R., Antología poética, Madrid, Cátedra, 2006.  
[141] Jiménez, J, R., Diario de un poeta recién casado, Madrid, Cátedra, 1998. 
[142] Machado, A.,  Obras Completas de Manuel y Antonio Machado, ed. De H. Carpintero, 

Madrid Biblioteca Nueva,  1978. 

[143] Machado, A.,  Obras. Poesía y prosa. Ed. De A. Albornoz  y G. de Torre Buenos Aires 
Losada 1974.  

[144] Machado, A.,  Poesías Completas, Madrid, Espasa Calpe, 1984. 
[145] Machado, M.,  Obras Completas de Manuel y Antonio Machado, Ed.Madrid, Biblioteca 

Nueva, 1978. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            627      

 

  

[146] Machado, M.,  Poesías, selec. Madrid Alianza, 1982. 
[147] Martí, J., Obras  de José Martí. Barcelona, Argos Vergara, 1979.  
[148] Martí, J., Antología. Editora Nacional, 1975.  
[149] Martí, J., Epistolario (Antología) Gredos, 1973. 
[150] Othon, J. M.,: Obras completas, ed. de J. Zabala México 1954. 
[151] Rueda, S., Antología poética 1885 – 1930, Madrid, Aguilar, 1945. 
[152] Salinas, P.,  Poesías completas. Barcelona,. Seix Barral, S.A., 1982 
[153] Salinas, P.,  Narraciones completas. Barcelona, Ediciones Península, 1998.  
[154] Salinas, P.,  Poemas escogidos. Madrid, Espasa – Calpe, 1982. 
[155] Santos Chocano, J., Antología poética , Madrid Espasa Calpe. 
[156] Santos Chocano, J., Los cien mejores poemas Madrid Aguilar. 
[157] Unamuno, M. de, Obras completas, 9 vol. Madrid, Escelicer, 1968- 1971.  
[158] Unamuno, M. de, Obras selectas, Madrid Biblioteca Nueva, 1977. 
[159] Unamuno, M. de, Poesía completa, Madrid, Alianza, 1993.  
[160] Unamuno, M. de, Poemas de los pueblos de España,  Madrid, Cátedra, 1987. 
[161] Urrutia, Jorge,..Poesia española del siglo XIX, Madrid, Cátedra, 1995 
[162] Valle Inclan, R. Mª. del,: Obras escogidas. 2 vol. Madrid Aguilar, 1976.  
[163] Valle Inclan, R. Mª. del, Claves líricas, Madrid Espasa-Calpe, 1995. 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            628      

 

  

[Index] 

Appendix 

 

The ELBA Project 

 

Το Έργο ELBA [English]  
 
Το πρόγραμμα της ELBA (ELectronic Book for Adults - Hλεκτρονικό Bιβλίο για 

Eνήλικες) αποτελεί μια τριετή ευρωπαϊκή εμπειρία που οδήγησε σε συνεργασία οργανισμούς 
προερχόμενους από  διαφορετικές ευρωπαϊκές χώρες (Ισπανία, Ελλάδα, Ιταλία, Κύπρο, 
Λιθουανία). Σε αυτό το τμήμα του ηλεκτρονικού βιβλίου μερικοί εταίροι του προγράμματος 
θέλησαν να εκφράσουν τί σήμαινε γι’ αυτούς η εμπειρία εργασίας για την υλοποίηση του 
προγράμματος ELBA και να μοιραστούν την εμπειρία αυτή με το ευρύ κοινό. 
  

Για έναν από τους εταίρους το πρόγραμμα ELBA αποτέλεσε την πρώτη τους διεθνή 
συνεργασία. Σύμφωνα με την αποκτηθείσα εμπειρία τους, δόθηκε μια μεγάλη ευκαιρία τόσο 
στους εκπαιδευτές όσο και στους εκπαιδευόμενους τους να βελτιώσουν τις δεξιότητές τους 
στην αγγλική γλώσσα, στις Τεχνολογίες Πληροφορικής και Επικοινωνιών και στη 
Λογοτεχνία. Επίσης υπήρξε μια θαυμάσια ευκαιρία να συναντηθούν με ανθρώπους από 
διαφορετικές ευρωπαϊκές χώρες, να γνωρίσουν   τον πολιτισμό και τις παραδόσεις τους και 
να μάθουν περισσότερα για την εκπαίδευση ενηλίκων στην Ευρώπη.  
 

Ένας άλλος εταίρος υπογραμμίζει ότι  η συμμετοχή στο πρόγραμμα ELBA τους 
έδωσε την ευκαιρία να εξερευνήσουν έναν τομέα στον οποίο δεν είχαν εξασκηθεί μέχρι 
εκείνη την στιγμή (τη Λογοτεχνία και τις τεχνικές ψηφιοποίησης), εμπλουτίζοντας κατ' αυτό 
τον τρόπο τη προσφερόμενη κατάρτιση του φορέα και επιτρέποντας στο προσωπικό να 
αποκτήσει νέες ειδικεύσεις και να καθιερώσει νέες σχέσεις, προσφέροντας έτσι μια μεγάλη 
προστιθέμενη αξία στον οργανισμό και στην τελοιοποίηση των δραστηριοτήτων του. Αυτά τα 
θετικά αποτελέσματα σίγουρα θα επηρεάσουν τα μελλοντικά σχέδια και προγράμματα. 
 

Επιπλέον, για έναν γυναικείο μη-κερδοσκοπικό οργανισμό, εταίρο του προγράμματος, 
το πρόγραμμα αποτέλεσε μια πραγματική, πολύτιμη και αξιόλογη  «εκμαθησιακή εμπειρία». 
Όχι μόνο το προσωπικό που ασχολήθηκε ανέπτυξε τις δεξιότητές του σχετικά με τους 
ευρωπαϊκούς πολιτισμούς και τις τεχνολογίες της πληροφορίας και της επικοινωνίας αλλά και 
οι εκπαιδευόμενοι που συμμετείχαν στις συναντήσεις και στις καταρτίσεις απόκτησαν μια 
καλύτερη γνώση της αγγλικής γλώσσας και είχαν την δυνατότητα να μοιραστούν τους 
διαφορετικούς πολιτισμούς, τις αξίες και τις εμπειρίες μιας διεθνούς συνεργασίας. Ένα άλλο 
σημαντικό στοιχείο αποτελεί η συνεργατικότητα: η συνεργασία στο πρόγραμμα ELBA 
αυξήθηκε χρόνο με το χρόνο αναπτύσσοντας ομαδικότητα και συνεργατικές δεξιότητες, 
ανοχή και  σεβασμό στα πρόσωπα και τις πολιτιστικές διαφοροποιήσεις. Η τελική  
αντανάκλαση ως προς τα πολιτιστικά ζητήματα προέρχεται από ένα τέταρτο εταίρο όπου η 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            629      

 

  

ομάδα του είχε την ευκαιρία να συμμετάσχει στη διεθνή συνεργασία του προγράμματος 
ELBA δουλεύοντας για έναν κοινό στόχο. Η εργασία σε ομάδες απαιτεί πολλή οργάνωση και 
ειδικά όταν αυτές δεν προέρχονται από το ίδιο πολιτιστικό υπόβαθρο και δεν μιλούν την ίδια 
γλώσσα. Αυτό που πέτυχε το πρόγραμμα ELBA ήταν ότι κατάφερε να εστιάσει στα κοινά 
χαρακτηριστικά που παρουσιάζουν όλοι οι άνθρωποι και να αφήσει στην άκρη τις εθνικές και 
πολιτιστικές διαφορές μας.  
 

Άρχισε έναν διαπολιτισμικό διάλογο και όλοι μας μάθαμε πολλά ο ένας από τον άλλο 
έχοντας κατά νου ότι προερχόμαστε από το βορρά, το νότο και την ανατολή της Ευρώπης. Τα 
λόγια της «Ένωσης Επιστημόνων Πληροφορικής Βοιωτίας», του εταίρου από Ελλάδα είναι 
σημαντικά και αξίζει να αναφερθούν στο σημείο αυτό:  

 
 «Το ίδιο το πρόγραμμα επιτυγχάνει τους στόχους του και είμαστε όλοι ευτυχείς και 

υπερήφανοι επειδή συμβάλαμε για αυτήν την έκβαση. Πιο σημαντικό όμως από την εξέλιξη 
του προγράμματος είναι η διαδικασία που ακολουθήθηκε κατά τη διάρκεια των τριών ετών 
της συνεργασίας. Οι συναντήσεις εργασίας καθώς και οι πολιτιστικές εκδηλώσεις που 
συνυπήρξαν πρόσφεραν στα μέλη του προγράμματος ELBA την ευκαιρία να συσπειρωθούν 
και να γίνουν πιο συμπαγείς απέναντι στους κοινούς μας στόχους.  Τα συναισθήματα που 
όλοι στην ομάδα μας μοιραστήκαμε επεκτείνονται πέρα από την ικανοποίηση της επιτυχούς 
έκβασης του προγράμματος και στη χαρά της δημιουργίας φιλίας μέσα από τη σύμπραξη του 
προγράμματος ELBA. Φίλοι και συνεργάτες με τους οποίους μοιραζόμαστε τα ίδια 
συναισθήματα της μετατροπής μιας συνεργασίας σε μια διαπολιτισμική φιλία». 
  

[Index] 

 

 

L’esperienza del progetto ELBA [English]
 
Il progetto ELBA (Libro Elettronico per gli Adulti) è un’esperienza europea di tre anni 

che ha riunito numerose istituzioni provenienti da diversi paesi Europei. (Spagna, Grecia, 
Italia, Cipro, Lituania). Nella presente sezione del libro elettronico  i partners del progetto 
hanno espresso ciò che lavorare nel progetto ELBA ha significato per loro e hanno voluto 
condividere questa esperienza con i lettori. 

 
Per uno dei partners, il progetto  rappresenta la prima esperienza internazionale di 

partecipazione ad una partnership di apprendimento . 
 
L’ esperienza, quindi,   ha rappresentato  una grande opportunità per insegnanti e 

studenti su alcuni versanti quali il miglioramento della conoscenza e dell’utilizzo della lingua 
inglese, la conoscenza delle ICT e l’apprendimento di nuove competenze letterarie. Il partner 
afferma  inoltre che il progetto ha rappresentato  anche una grande opportunità per incontrare 
persone provenienti da paesi europei differenti, per conoscere la loro cultura e tradizioni ed 
imparare a conoscere meglio l’ambito dell’educazione e della formazione degli adulti in 
Europa.  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            630      

 

  

 
Un’  altra organizzazione sottolinea come la partecipazione al progetto ELBA abbia 

offerto l’opportunità di esplorare un settore non molto praticato fino ad allora (la letteratura e 
le tecnologie di digitalizzazione), arricchendo in questo modo la sua varietà di offerta 
formativa e offrendo al personale l’opportunità di acquisire nuove competenze e di costruire 
nuove relazioni. Tutto ciò, si afferma, è stato di grande valore aggiunto e ha migliorato 
“l’eccellenza” delle attività; tali risultati ottenuti influenzeranno quindi  positivamente e 
sicuramente i piani ed i progetti futuri dell’istituzione partner.  

 
Inoltre, per un’associazione femminile no-profit, partner del progetto, questa è stata  

un’esperienza di apprendimento di valore, reale e preziosa.  Non solo ogni membro dello staff 
coinvolto ha sviluppato le proprie competenze in relazione alla cultura europea e alle ICT, ma 
anche gli studenti che hanno partecipato agli incontri e ai corsi di formazione, hanno acquisito 
una migliore conoscenza della lingua inglese e hanno avuto l’occasione di condividere culture 
diverse, valori ed esperienze internazionali. Un altro importante aspetto legato alla partnership 
è il seguente: il gruppo ELBA ha avuto l’occasione di crescere anno dopo anno, sviluppando 
competenze collaborative di gruppo, tolleranza e rispetto delle differenze culturali ed 
individuali. La riflessione finale legata ad elementi culturali arriva da una quarta istituzione: il 
suo team ha avuto l’opportunità di partecipare ad un progetto di cooperazione internazionale e 
di lavorare per uno scopo comune. Lavorare in gruppo richiede molta organizzazione 
specialmente quando questo gruppo non condivide la stessa cultura e lo stesso linguaggio. Ciò 
che il progetto ELBA ha ottenuto è stato il focalizzarsi sulle caratteristiche comuni possedute 
da tutta l’umanità e dimenticarsi le differenze culturali e nazionali. Un dialogo interculturale è 
iniziato e tutto il partenariato ha  imparato molto da ciascuno, pur considerando che i partners 
provenivamo dai 4 angoli  d’ Europa.  
Le parole degli esperti delle Tecnologie dell’informazione e della comunicazione della 
provincia di Viotia, che hanno preso parte al progetto  ” sono significative e valevoli di essere 
qui sotto citate:  
 

“Il progetto sta raggiungendo i suoi obiettivi e siamo tutti felici ed orgogliosi  perché 
abbiamo contribuito a questo risultato. Più importante dei risultati del progetto sono stati però 
tutti i processi che hanno avuto luogo durante i tre anni di cooperazione. I nostri incontri così 
come i nostri eventi culturali che si sono  realizzati durante gli incontri di lavoro, hanno 
offerto allo staff dei partners del progetto  ELBA l’opportunità di diventare sempre  più uniti e 
concreti verso la realizzazione degli obiettivi. I sentimenti che noi tutti nel nostro team 
condividiamo, si riferiscono non solo alla soddisfazione per aver completato con successo un 
progetto, ma soprattutto alla gioia di aver costruito una grande amicizia  all’interno della 
partnership ELBA. Amici e partners con i quali condividiamo gli stessi sentimenti per aver 
promosso una co-operazione che si è trasformata progressivamente in  un’amicizia 
interculturale”. 
 

 [Index]  



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            631      

 

  

 

 ELBA Projekto Patirtis [English]  
 
ELBA projektas (Elektroninė knyga suaugusiems) – tai trijų metų veikla, sujungusi 

organizacijas iš įvairių Europos šalių (Ispanijos, Graikijos, Italijos, Kipro, Lietuvos). Šioje 
elektroninės knygos skyriuje projekto partneriai norėtų pasidalinti savo patirtimi bei 
įspūdžiais. 

 
Partneriams iš vienos projekte dalyvavusių šalių ELBA buvo pirmasis tarptautinės 

partnerystės žingsnis. Jų nuomone, tai buvo puiki patirtis: mokytojai ir mokiniai tobulino 
anglų kalbos, darbo kompiuteriu įgūdžius, plėtė kultūrinį dialogą. Be to, tai buvo puiki 
galimybė pažinti įvairių Europos šalių kultūrą, tradicijas, žmones, sužinoti apie suaugusiųjų 
švietimo organizavimą skirtingose Europos vietose. 

 
Kitos šalies atstovai pabrėžė, kad dalyvavimas ELBA projekte paskatino juos daugiau 

sužinoti apie elektroninių knygų kūrimą bei naudojimosi jomis galimybes. Ši veikla padėjo 
įgyti naujų kompetencijų ir užmegzti savitarpio santykius. Visa veikla paskatino ir toliau 
dirbti bei dalyvauti kituose projektuose. 

 
Trečia projekto partnerė, nepelno siekianti moterų asociacija, dalyvaudama projekte 

įgijo vertingos patirties, kadangi įgūdžius, susijusius su projektine veikla, tobulino ne tik 
personalas, bet ir mokiniai, kurie aktyviai dalyvavo tiek susitikimuose, tiek mokymuose. Tuo 
būdu visiems buvo suteikta galimybė susipažinti su įvairių šalių kultūra, vertybėmis, įgyti 
patirties. 

 
Svarbu paminėti tai, kad per tris metus ELBOS dalyviai pažino vieni kitus, išmoko 

bendradarbiauti, gerbti ir toleruoti kitus žmones bei įvairių kultūrų skirtumus. Dar vienos 
institucijos atstovai džiaugėsi galimybe dalyvauti tarptautiniame projekte bei kartu su kitais 
partneriais siekti bendro tikslo. Darbas grupėse, kurias skyrė ne tik  kalba, bet ir kultūra, 
reikalavo kantrybės ir organizacinių gebėjimų. Šalys partnerės buvo iš skirtingų Europos 
vietų: pietų, rytų – tad visi dalyviai, pamiršę kultūrinius skirtumus, turėjo puikią galimybę 
glaudžiai bendrauti bei bendradarbiauti.  

 
Dalyvių iš “Viotia informacinių technologijų specialistų sąjungos” nuomonė tik dar 

kartą patvirtino anksčiau išsakytas mintis: „Projekto tikslai buvo įgyvendinti, tad esame 
laimingi ir didžiuojamės prie to prisidėję. Pati projekto veikla bei bendradarbiavimas buvo ne 
mažiau svarbūs nei jo rezultatai. Kultūriniai renginiai projekto dalyvių susitikimų metu 
suteikė ELBOS parteriams galimybę pajusti vienybę bei skatino dar intensyviau siekti 
užsibrėžtų tikslų. Smagu, kad ne tik sėkmingai pasiekėme finišą, bet susiradome draugų bei 
partnerių, kuriuos dabar jungia siekiai bendradarbiauti bei stiprinti tarpkultūrinį vientisumą.“ 

 

 

 [Index] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            632      

 

  

El Proyecto ELBA [English]  
 

El proyecto ELBA ( Libro electrónico para Adultos) es una experiencia a nivel 
europeo de tres años de duración que reunió a varias instituciones de España, Grecia, Italia, 
Chipre y Lituania. En esta sección del libro electrónico los socios participantes del proyecto 
manifiestan lo que para ellos significó trabajar en el proyecto Elba y hacerlo conocer del gran 
público. 
 

Para uno de los socios participantes del proyecto Elba éste era su primera 
participación en un consorcio a nivel internacional. Desde el punto de vista de la experiencia 
ésta era una gran oportunidad tanto para profesores como para estudiantes de mejorar su nivel 
en inglés, nuevas tecnologías TIC y habilidades literarias. También constituyó una gran suerte 
poder entrar en contacto con otras gentes provenientes de distintos países europeos, conocer 
sus culturas y tradiciones y avanzar en el conocimiento de la educación de adultos en Europa. 

 
Otro socio subraya que la participación en el proyecto Elba les dio la oportunidad de 

explorar un nuevo campo hasta ese momento poco explorado como la literatura y las técnicas 
de digitalización, ampliando de esta manera el abanico de la oferta en formación y 
permitiendo a su personal la adquisición de nuevas competencias y contactos relacionales. 
Esto proporcionó un gran valor añadido mejorando la excelencia en las actividades, cuyos 
resultados alcanzados de seguro conseguirán influir en los planes y proyectos del futuro. 

 
Aún más, para una asociación de mujeres, socio del proyecto, Elba ha sido una 

experiencia de aprendizaje real , valiosa y preciada. No sólo desarrollaron sus destrezas los 
miembros directamente involucrados en el proyecto en relación con la cultura europea y las 
TIC, sino, también los estudiantes que participaron en las reuniones y en los cursos de 
formación, quienes adquirieron un conocimiento más profundo de la lengua inglesa y tuvieron 
la oportunidad de compartir distintas culturas, valores y las experiencias internacionales 
derivadas. 

 
Otra factor importante está relacionado con el consorcio: El consorcio Elba tuvo la 

oportunidad de crecer año tras año desarrollando habilidades cooperativas de equipo, y 
tolerancia y respeto a las diferencias individuales y culturales. 

 
La reflexión final sobre asuntos culturales proviene de un cuarto asociado: su equipo 

tuvo la oportunidad de participar en un proyecto de cooperación internacional y trabajar por 
un objetivo común. Trabajar en equipo exige mucha organización sobretodo cuando los 
grupos provienen de diferentes culturas y no comparten la misma lengua. 
El logro del proyecto Elba fue centrarse en las características comunes que tienen todos los 
seres humanos y olvidar así las diferencias culturales y nacionales propias. Se comenzó un 
diálogo internacional y todos aprendimos el uno del otro sin olvidar que proveníamos del 
norte, del  sur y del este de Europa. 
 

Las palabras de Union of Information Technology Scientists of Viotia, socio del 
proyecto, son muy significativas y merecen ser reproducidas aquí: 
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            633      

 

  

“El proyecto en sí mismo está alcanzando sus objetivos y estamos muy contentos y 
orgullosos porque hemos contribuido a este resultado. Más importante que el propio resultado 
del proyecto ha sido el conjunto de procedimientos que tuvieron lugar durante los tres años de 
trabajo cooperativo. Tanto las reuniones de proyecto como las actividades paralelas a aquéllas 
ofrecieron a nuestro equipo de Elba la oportunidad de unirnos y ser concretos en los objetivos. 
El sentimiento que todos en nuestro equipo compartimos está no sólo en la satisfacción de 
acabar con éxito un proyecto, sino especialmente en la alegría de haber hecho amigos en el 
consorcio. Amigos y socios con los que igualmente compartimos el mismo sentimiento de 
haber impulsado la co-operación para una amistad intercultural”. 

 

 [Index] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            634      

 

  

 [Index] 

Prologue 

 

Πρόλογος     [English]  
 
Ανήκουμε σ’ έναν κόσμο όπου σημαντικές αλλαγές στον τρόπο επικοινωνίας και των 

μέσων παραγωγής λαμβάνουν χώρα. Τρόποι και μέσα στενά συνδεδεμένα ενισχύουν την 
αποκαλούμενη Κοινωνία της Γνώσης. 
  

Σε όλη την ιστορία του ανθρώπινου γένους υπεύθυνα μέσα για τη συσσώρευση και τη 
μετάδοση αυτής της γνώσης υπήρξαν τα βιβλία, οι βιβλιοθήκες και τα εκάστοτε εκπαιδευτικά 
συστήματα. Σήμερα, στοιχεία κλειδιά όπως οι βιβλιοθήκες και το σχολείο υφίστανται μια 
βαθιά μεταμόρφωση που αντανακλά αφενός νέους τρόπους συγγραφής, δόμησης και 
οργάνωσης ενός νέου είδους βιβλιοθηκών και αφετέρου  την ανάγκη εκπαιδευτικών και 
παιδαγωγικών μεθόδων προς μια διαδικασία δια βίου μάθησης. Επιπλέον, το είδος της 
ζητούμενης εργασίας στην επερχόμενη Κοινωνία της Γνώσης απαιτεί ολοένα και 
περισσότερη πληροφορία καθώς και μια πολύ δυναμική γνώση που ακολουθεί την ταχύτητα 
των καιρών.  
 
 Σε αυτό το γενικό πλαίσιο θελήσαμε να συνεισφέρουμε με την παρούσα εργασία στην 
διαδικασία εύρεσης νέων τρόπων εργασίας και οργάνωσής της (συντονισμένα και 
κατανεμημένα) καθώς και στη μελέτη πειραματικών νέων μεθοδολογιών που αφορούν τις 
εκδόσεις, μέσω τεχνικών ικανοτήτων των σύχρονων νέων απαιτήσεων.  

 
Οργανώνοντας τη δουλειά μας συνειδητοποιήσαμε ότι συνεργαζόμαστε και στην 

πολιτιστική ενοποίηση των χωρών που έλαβαν μέρος στο έργο (και της Ευρώπης γενικότερα) 
μέσα από ένα προϊόν το περιέχομενο του οποίου περιλαμβάνει την τέχνη της Ποίησης, που 
αποτελεί μια από τις πιο ευαίσθητες εκδηλώσεις  ενός πολιτισμού. 
 

Έτσι αντλήσαμε μια Ευρωπαϊκή Συλλογή Ποίησης και Τέχνης από τον 19ο έως και τα 
μέσα του 20ου αιώνα των χωρών που συμμετείχαν στην ανάπτυξη του έργου. Ξεκινήσαμε τη 
δουλειά μας αντλώντας το περιέχομενο και τη δομή του ηλεκτρονικού βιβλίου.  

 
Φυσικά αυτό μας οδήγησε πρωταρχικά σε μια μελέτη της Λογοτεχνίας, του 

Πολιτισμού και της Ιστορίας που  πλαισίωσαν την παραπάνω χρονική περίοδο. 
Συμφωνήσαμε ότι η Συλλογή θα περιείχε από ένα ποίημα περίπου πενήντα ποιητών από κάθε 
συμμετέχουσα χώρα. 
 

Μελετήσαμε τα πολιτιστικά και ιστορικά πλαίσια καθώς και τις αντίστοιχες 
ομοιότητες μεταξύ των χωρών και είχαμε την ευκαιρία να διαπιστώσουμε ότι η ενοποίηση 
της Ευρώπης θα έπρεπε να περιλαμβάνει την ανάπτυξη μιας αμοιβαίας γνώσης που θα 
επαναπροσδιόριζε την προσέγγιση μεταξύ των πολιτισμών.  
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            635      

 

  

 Αποτέλεσμα της παραπάνω εργασίας υπήρξε μια συλλογή περισσοτέρων από 250 
ποιημάτων από συγγραφείς των πέντε χωρών και γραμμένων σε τέσσερις διαφορετικές 
γλώσσες. Προκειμένου να αποκτήσουμε ένα ομογενές προϊόν, δεχθήκαμε την Αγγλική ως 
κοινή γλώσσα επικοινωνίας ενώ κρατήσαμε και τις επιμέρους γλώσσες για να αναδειχθεί η 
διαφορετικότητα μέσα στο σύνολο. Υπήρξε απαραίτητο, επομένως, να βρούμε υπάρχουσες 
μεταφράσεις των ποιημάτων και στην περίπτωση που δεν βρέθηκαν μεταφράσεις, να 
προχωρήσουμε οι ίδιοι σε μεταφράσεις ποιημάτων, με αποτέλεσμα ένα πολυγλωσσικό 
προϊόν. 
 

Η παραπάνω εργασία σε επίπεδο διαννόησης θεωρούμε ότι υπήρξε απαραίτητη πριν 
ξεκινήσουμε οποιαδήποτε τεχνική διεργασία καθόσον μάλιστα η μελέτη και η κατανόηση του 
σκοπού που το έργο ήθελε να επιτελέσει κρίθηκε ότι ενεργοποίησε και εμπλούτισε την τελική 
διαδικασία μορφοποίησης του έργου. 
 

Το υλικό και οι τεχνικές που χρησιμοποιήθηκαν συνεισφέρουν στην Κοινωνίας της 
Γνώσης καθώς προάγουν τη δημιουργία πολιτισμού , την εύκολη διάχυση της γνώσης και την 
εφαρμογή των τεχνικών σε διαδικασίες παραγωγής υλικών αγαθών.  

 
Μέχρι αυτό το σημείο, επικεντρώσαμε τη δουλειά μας στον καθορισμό της 

υλοποίησης του ηλεκτρονικού βιβλίου, δηλαδή του απτού τελικού προϊόντος που θέλαμε, 
γεγονός που αρχικά μας οδήγησε στη μελέτη της φύσης και δομής βιβλίων αυτού του τύπου 
και στη συνέχεια στην εκμάθηση τεχνικών ψηφιοποίησης απαραίτητων προκειμένου να 
περάσουμε από το υλικό στο χαρτί στη νέα ηλεκτρονική έκδοση του και να καταλήξουμε στα 
πιο κατάλληλα μέσα για την περίπτωσή μας. 
 
 
 Οι παραπάνω εργασίες διανεμήθηκαν στα συμμετέχοντα μέλη της ομάδας του έργου 
χρησιμοποιώντας υπολογιστικά μέσα επικοινωνίας μεταξύ αυτών. Οι μαθητές των 
εμπλεκόμενων ινστιτούτων εκμάθησης ασχολήθηκαν με την εκμάθηση τεχνικών 
ψηφιοποίησης καθώς και με τη μελέτη της φύσης και της δομής των ψηφιακών βιβλίων. Με 
τον τρόπο αυτό προχωρήσαμε συνεισφέροντας στη διαδικασία της δια βίου επαγελματικής 
κατάρτισης με ένα θέμα βασιζόμενο στις νέες τεχνολογίες που επιπλέον συνεισφέρει 
σημαντικά στη διαδικασία των ψηφιακών εκδόσεων.  

  
 Είναι γεγονός πως στο άμεσο μέλλον το μεγαλύτερο ποσοστό πληροφορίας θα 
διακινείται ψηφιακά. Ετσι θεωρούμε ότι η κατάρτιση σε τέτοιες τεχνικές θα αποτελέσει τον 
ακρογωνιαίο λίθο στην εκμάθηση και άλλων τεχνικών που περιλαμβάνουν την κατασκευή 
"ηλεκτρονικών κειμένων" με χρήση εικόνων, ήχου, βίντεο και άλλων διαδραστικών 
εργαλείων  και που θα διευκολύνουν την διαδικασία της εκπαίδευσης.   
 

Εξάλλου, οι ηλεκτρονικές μέθοδοι συγγραφής και εκδόσεων, αρκετά διαφορετικές 
από τις μηχανικές τεχνικές του Γουτεμβέργιου στο παρελθόν, χρησιμοποιούν υπολογιστικά 
συστήματα που προσφέρουν ψηφιακές εκδόσεις απλούστερες, πιο εύκολες στη δημιουργία 
και συντήρησή τους και πολύ πιο οικονομικές από τις αντίστοιχες των παλιών τεχνολογιών. 
Είναι πολύ εύκολο πλέον να εγκαταστήσει κανείς μονάδες παραγωγής ψηφιακών εκδόσεων 
υψηλής ποιότητας ακόμη και στο σπίτι.    
 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            636      

 

  

 Επιπλέον, η προώθηση των ψηφιακών εκδόσεων, όχι μόνο για τα καινούρια αλλά και 
για τα υπάρχοντα στις βιβλιοθήκες κειμένα και η οργάνωσή τους σε ψηφιακές βιβλιοθήκες 
καθιστά πιο εύκολη την διαδικασία εύρεσης και ανάγνωσης βιβλίων και πιο προσιτή την 
πρόσβαση στον παγκόσμιο πολιτισμό. 
  
 Ολοκληρώσαμε η δουλειά μας με την έκδοση ενός ηλεκτρονικού βιβλίου  που 
τιτλοφορείται " Κοινωνική Ευρωπαϊκή Συλλογή Ποίησης και Τέχνης (1800-1950)". Οι 
εργασίες του τελευταίου σταδίου περιλάμβαναν βασικά το σχεδιασμό της δομής και της 
φυσικής υλοποίησης του ηλεκτρονικού βιβλίου.  
 
 Ο καθορισμός της δομής περιλάμβανε τον χωρισμό του υλικού σε πέντε κεφάλαια(ένα 
για κάθε χώρα).  Κάθε  κεφάλαιο αποτελείται από ένα εισαγωγικό μέρος στο οποίο 
παρατίθεται το ιστορικό-κοινωνικό πλαίσιο της εποχής για κάθε χώρα, μια λίστα με τους 
ποιητές-καλλιτέχνες της ενώ για κάθε ποιητή της λίστας παρατίθεται μια σύντομη βιογραφία 
του ακολουθούμενη από τα ποιήματα του ποιητή. Κάθε ποίημα παρουσιάζεται σε μορφή δύο 
στηλών, μια για την αρχική γλώσσα και μια για την Αγγλική. Επιπλέον, στο βιβλίο 
περιέχονται και κάποια κοινά τμήματα Προλόγου, Εισαγωγής, Ευχαριστιών κτλ. 

    
Η πλοήγηση στα διάφορα μέρη του βιβλίου πραγματοποιείται διαμέσου κατάλληλα 

τοποθετημένων συνδέσμων (υπερσυνδέσμων) καθιστώντας πιο εύκολη την ανάγνωση και 
εύρεση πληροφορίας στο βιβλίο. 
 

Πέρα από το τελικό προϊόν που ήταν ο κύριος σκοπός του έργου ELBA και την επαφή 
με νέες τεχνικές και πρακτικές  επισημαίνουμε έναν άλλο σκοπό του έργου που αφορά στην 
συντονισμένη και κατανεμημένη οργάνωση και υλοποίηση του έργου καθώς και την εμπειρία 
συνεργασίας διαμέσου ηλεκτρονικών δικτύων μεγάλης γεωγραφικής εμβέλειας. Το τελευταίο 
θα έπρεπε ίσως να συμπεριλαμβάνεται στο πρόγραμμα των επαγγελματικών ινστιτούτων 
κατάρτισης προκειμένου να  οργανώνουν ομάδες σε διαφορετικές χώρες και γεωγραφικές 
περιοχές. 
 

Η ανάπτυξη του ηλεκτρονικού βιβλίου πέρα από τις τεχνικές πλευρές της δουλειάς, 
μας βοήθησε να γνωριστούμε μεταξύ μας μέσα από την ανταλλαγή πολιτισμικών στοιχείων 
και την ενσωμάτωσή μας σε ένα ευρύ φάσμα διαφορετικών πολιτισμικών δραστηριοτήτων σε 
κάθε χώρα. Επιπρόσθετα, όσο οι διαφορετικοί ευρωπαϊκοί πολιτισμοί ακολουθούν 
διαφορετικό ρυθμό ανάπτυξης, οι νέες τεχνολογίες  λειτουργούν ως βοηθητικά μέσα για τη 
μείωση του χάσματος μεταξύ ατομικής και κοινωνικής ανάπτυξης για την εδραίωση μιας 
κοινής ευρωπαϊκής ψυχής. 
 

Από αυτή την οπτική και κάτω από το πλαίσιο της οικοδόμησης ενός διαπολιτισμικού 
διαλόγου, το έργο ELBA αποτελεί ένα δείγμα  συνεκτικής συμμετοχής στη δημουργία ενός 
πολιτισμικού δικτυακού συνόλου που προήγαγε την εισαγωγή σε νέες τεχνολογίες και μας 
παρείχε μια καρποφόρα συνεργασία που ενίσχυσε την πρωτοβουλία και υπευθυνότητα των 
συμμετεχόντων. 
  
 
Pilar Cataño Canabal 
Συντονίστρια Έργου ELBA 

 [Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            637      

 

  

 

Prologo [English]  
 

Viviamo in un mondo nel quale stanno avvenendo  cambiamenti profondi  che 
incidono sulle modalità e sui mezzi di comunicazione. Modalità e mezzi  strettamente legati 
per sostenere la cosiddetta Società della Conoscenza.  
 

Nella storia dell’umanità, l’accumulazione e la trasmissione di questa conoscenza 
sono state  realizzate attraverso i  libri, le  biblioteche  ed i sistemi educativi. Attualmente gli 
elementi-chiave della conoscenza quali le scuole e le biblioteche stanno subendo una 
profonda trasformazione che riflette, da un lato, le nuove modalità  editoriali e la struttura ed 
organizzazione dei nuovi tipi di biblioteca e, dall’altro,  la necessità per le  metodologie 
pedagogiche ed educative, di evolvere verso  la capacità di essere metodologie utili 
all’apprendimento durante tutto l’arco della vita. Inoltre, la richiesta   di lavoro necessaria alla 
sempre più presente  Società della Conoscenza,    coinvolgerà   un aumento costante di 
informazioni ed una conoscenza altamente dinamica, in grado di muoversi velocemente al 
passo con i tempi. 
 

All’interno di questo quadro generale, il progetto ha voluto contribuire 
all’individuazione di nuove modalità  di lavoro e di organizzazione del lavoro e alla ricerca di 
nuove metodologie sperimentali applicate all’editoria non tradizionale, tramite l’utilizzo  di 
competenze tecniche e requisiti innovativi.   

 
In fase di realizzazione del progetto, inoltre, il partenariato è diventato sempre più 

consapevole  del fatto che la collaborazione coinvolgeva strettamente l’integrazione culturale 
dei Paesi,  sia quelli partecipanti al progetto che tutti i Paesi europei attraverso 
l’implementazione di un prodotto il cui contenuto  riguardava la poesia, storicamente  tra le 
più adeguate espressioni culturali.  

 
Per questo il partenariato ha realizzato  una Raccolta Europea di Poesia e Arte dal 19° 

alla metà del 20° secolo dei Paesi partecipanti al progetto. Il lavoro di raccolta è iniziato con  
la stesura dei contenuti e la  definizione della struttura del testo elettronico, uno dei prodotti  
previsti dal progetto.    
 

Il prodotto realizzato ha ovviamente richiesto uno studio preventivo   della Letteratura, 
Cultura e Storia che ha abbracciato tutto il periodo determinato. E’ stato anche concordato che 
la raccolta contenesse un poema di ognuno dei cinquanta  poeti selezionati in ogni Paese 
partecipante.  
 

Il partenariato ha pertanto studiato i repertori storici e culturali, i contesti, le similarità 
tra i diversi Paesi ed ha avuto l’opportunità di riflettere  sul fatto che ci potrebbe essere un 
capovolgimento di fronte nell’integrazione europea. Una mutua conoscenza per sostenere  il 
terreno comune europeo che garantirebbe un avvicinamento tra le culture.  
 

Il risultato di questo lavoro è stata la raccolta di più di 250 opere, di autori  di cinque  
Paesi, scritti in quattro diverse lingue . Allo scopo di ottenere un prodotto omogeneo il 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            638      

 

  

partenariato ha scelto la lingua inglese come veicolo di comunicazione, mantenendo anche la 
propria lingua per esprimere la diversità all’interno dell’unitarietà. E’ stato pertanto 
necessario reperire, successivamente, le traduzioni dei poemi o tradurli se non vi erano, con 
l’obiettivo di realizzare un prodotto multi lingue. 

 
Il compimento del precedente lavoro intellettuale è parso  assolutamente necessario 

prima di cominciare un processo  di tipo tecnico,  in quanto studiare e conoscere  gli obiettivi 
delle azioni da realizzare stimola ed arricchisce il processo formativo. 

 
Essendo focalizzati sulla Società della conoscenza, i temi principali  sono stati  il 

contenuto e le tecniche utilizzate, Rispetto a ciò il lavoro dovrebbe facilitare la creazione di 
cultura, la sua diffusione  e l’applicazione  al processo di produzione dei beni tramite 
l’utilizzo di tecnologie informatiche. 

 
Dapprima  il lavoro è stato focalizzato sulla definizione della struttura del testo 

elettronico, in altre parole del prodotto materiale che avevamo in mente. L’architettura  
struttura ci ha portato prima alla ricerca della  natura e della struttura  di questo  tipo  di testo. 
In secondo luogo, l’obiettivo è stato di apprendere le tecniche di digitalizzazione,  necessarie 
per passare  dai testi su supporto cartaceo a quelli su supporto elettronico e di  sperimentare 
quali fossero i mezzi più adeguati da utilizzare nel nostro caso. 

 
Successivamente le attività sono state distribuite tra i   diversi partner attraverso 

l’elaborazioni di strumenti di comunicazione elettronica. I discenti adulti  delle diverse 
Organizzazioni sono stati coinvolti nella formazione sulle diverse tecniche di digitalizzazione 
e sulla strutturazione del testo elettronico. E’ stato pertanto inserito, all’interno della lifelong 
learning  per gli adulti, un tema  innovativo, basato su una nuova tecnologia, il quale inoltre 
ha sulla pubblicazione digitale, un forte effetto moltiplicatore. 

 
Effettivamente nel futuro imminente, la maggior parte delle informazioni  circolerà su 

basi digitali. Siamo convinti che la qualificazione di tali tecniche  sarà il fondamento della 
diffusione e dell’apprendimento di altre tecniche che saranno enunciate e spiegate attraverso 
“testi digitali”, con la possibilità di inserire immagini, suoni e collegamenti con video e altri 
strumenti interattivi che faciliteranno la formazione. 

 
Inoltre, grazie all’essenza stessa   delle tecniche elettroniche, molto diverse da quelle 

originariamente proposte da Gutenberg, sarà possibile rendere più semplici,    oltre che molto  
più economico,  le piattaforme hardware necessarie alla produzione di edizioni digitali, la loro 
installazione, la loro manutenzione,  rispetto ai metodi tradizionalmente usati. Diventerà 
dunque più facile installare piccole unità produttive, anche da casa, per la produzione di 
prodotti digitali ad alto livello qualitativo.  

 
Sull’altro versante, la promozione di testi ed edizioni digitali, non solo di nuovi testi 

nuovi ma anche di quelli che giacciono  nelle biblioteche  e negli archivi e la loro 
organizzazione in biblioteche digitali, faciliterà la lettura di libri e l’accesso ad una cultura 
fruibile da tutti. 

 
Il lavoro è stato portato a termine con l’edizione di un testo elettronico su supporto   

informatico, intitolato “Antologia Europea  Sociale della Poesia e dell’Arte (1800- 1950)”. Le 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            639      

 

  

attività intraprese nell’ultima fase hanno principalmente riguardato la progettazione della 
struttura e la realizzazione fisica del testo elettronico. 

 
La struttura è stata definita dalla divisione del materiale in 5 capitoli (uno per ogni 

Paese partecipante al progetto). Ogni sezione è costituita da un introduzione che illustra, per 
ogni Paese,  il contesto storico del periodo considerato, un indice degli autori, una breve 
biografia di ciascuno di loro e un poema su due colonne, la prima con il testo originale, la 
seconda con la traduzione o, in assenza di questa, con una breve descrizione/commento. 
Inoltre il testo elettronico contiene altre sezioni dedicate al  prologo, all’introduzione, ai 
ringraziamenti e alla bibliografia. 

 
La navigazione  all’interno del testo è consentita da una serie di collegamenti 

(hyperlinks)  che, partendo dall’indice conducono il lettore ai diversi capitoli e, dagli indici 
dei diversi capitoli, alla sezione di ogni poeta con la possibilità di ritornare indietro, rendendo 
così lo spostamento all’interno del testo, facile ed efficace. 

 
I passi successivi del progetto hanno inoltre valutato  l’opportunità di inserire il testo 

all’interno della rete o la possibilità di cominciare a costruire una biblioteca digitale. 
 
Al di là dello specifico prodotto descritto, obiettivo principale del progetto ELBA e 

l’introduzione di nuove tecniche e pratiche,  è stato raggiunto l’obiettivo di utilizzare 
un’organizzazione coordinata e condivisa nello sviluppo di progetti e la sperimentazione di un 
lavoro cooperativo attraverso l’uso di reti informatiche collocate in aree geograficamente 
molto distanti. Questo tema dovrebbe essere inserito come area formativa all’interno dei corsi 
delle Organizzazioni partecipanti allo scopo di costituire gruppi di lavoro collocati in Paesi  
diversi e aree geografiche distanti. 

 
 Al di là degli aspetti tecnici del lavoro effettuato, lo sviluppo di un testo elettronico ha 

consentito  la conoscenza reciproca tra i partners, attraverso la definizione dei profili culturali 
dei diversi Paesi e ha favorito il trasferimento della conoscenza  e, di conseguenza,  
l’integrazione all’interno dell’ampia diversità culturale  dei Paesi partecipanti al progetto. 
Inoltre, poiché il processo di evoluzione delle diverse culture europee ha ritmi diversi, le 
nuove tecnologie agiscono da strumenti che colmano le lacune  tra individuo e sviluppo 
sociale per la nascita  di un’unica anima europea.  
 

Rispetto a ciò e all’interno del nuovo quadro di costruzione del dialogo interculturale, 
il progetto ELBA si pone some esempio di partecipazione congiunta per la creazione di una 
rete culturale all’interno di un testo, il quale ha promosso l’introduzione delle nuove 
tecnologie e ha dato spazio ad una fruttuosa attività di collaborazione, aumentando l’iniziativa 
e la responsabilità di tutti i partecipanti.  
 
 
 
Pilar Cataño Canabal 
Coordinatore del Projetto ELBA 
 

[Index] 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            640      

 

  

 

Prologas [English]  
 

Pastaraisiais metais didieji komunikaciniai pokyčiai įgavo pagreitį, tad plačioji 
visuomenė yra tiesiogiai priversta taikytis prie naujovių. 

 
 Istorijos tėkmėje žinios buvo perduodamos bibliotekose, per knygas, o šiuolaikinis 
švietimas transformuojasi, tampa svarbi mokymosi visą gyvenimą koncepcija. Atsiranda 
naujos bibliotekos, knygos, kuriose bandoma sutalpinti didžiulį informacijos kiekį. 
 
 Šiame kontekste savo projektu norėjome plėtoti šiuolaikines technologijas, taikyti 
naujus, atitinkančius laikmečio poreikius veiklos metodus. Organizuodami darbą, stengėmės 
suvienyti visas projekte dalyvaujančias šalis partneres, integruoti projekto, atskleidžiančio 
poezijos ekspresiją kultūrinėje plotmėje, veiklą. 
 

Tokiu būdu ėmėme rinkti XIX a. – XX a.vidurio darbų kolekciją, atskleidžiančią 
projekte dalyvavusių šalių istorinį laikmetį bei kultūrą, sutarėme dėl elektroninės knygos 
turinio bei struktūros. Buvo nutarta surinkti penkiasdešimties kiekvienos šalies poetų 
veikalus. Taip pat buvo išnagrinėtas kultūrinis bei istorinis kontekstas, šalių panašumai bei 
skirtumai, stengiamasi derinti nuomones bei pakreipti veiklą bendra linkme. 

 
Viso darbo rezultatas matomas 250-yje eilėraščių iš penkių šalių, parašytų keturiomis 

kalbomis. Kad sukurtume homogenišką produktą, pasirinkome anglų kalbą kaip pagrindą, 
jungiantį šalių įvairialypiškumą. Ieškojome eilėraščių vertimo, o jų neradę, trumpai juos 
aprašėme ar vertėme patys. Rezultatas – įvairiakalbis  produktas. 

 
Ši intelektinė veikla yra kitos, techninės, veiklos pagrindas. Plačiajai visuomenei, 

kuriai šis darbas ir yra orientuotas, svarbiausia yra turinys bei veiklos būdai, todėl sklaida taps 
produktyvesnė, metodai aiškesni. Tačiau, prieš parašant knygą, reikėjo nubrėžti gaires, kurios 
padėtų atrinkti produktyviausias technines bei skaitmenines priemones, padedančias kurti 
knygą. Taigi teko išstudijuoti elektroninių knygų kilmę, struktūrą, pasidalinti užduotis bei 
įtraukti projekte dalyvaujančių institucijų mokinius į knygos kūrimą ir jos techninį 
apipavidalinimą.  

 
Artimiausioje ateityje skaitmeninės technologijos užims svarbią vietą tiek kuriant 

knygas, tiek plėtojant ir kitą kultūrinę veiklą. Popierines knygas pakeis elektroninės vaizdo 
bei garso knygos, lengvinančios lavinamąjį procesą. Elektroninė informacija labai palengvina 
darbą, yra produktyvesnė bei ekonomiškesnė nei Guttenbergo mechaninės priemonės. Šitokia 
produkcija yra prieinama net namuose. 

Taigi yra labai svarbu, kad ne tik naujai sukurti, bet ir mūsų senosiose bibliotekose 
gulintys popieriniai tekstai būtų perkelti į elektronines bibliotekas ir taptų prieinami 
visuomenei. 
 

Po ilgai trukusio darbo pavadinome savo knygą „Socialinės poezijos bei meno 
europinė kolekcija (1800 – 1950)“, ją apipavidalinome ir paruošėme vartotojui. 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            641      

 

  

Knyga susideda iš penkių dalių – viena dalis vienai šaliai (projekto partnerei). 
Kiekviena dalis susideda iš įžangos, atskleidžiančios šalies istorinį kontekstą, kūrėjų rodyklės 
bei jų biografijos faktų, po kurių seka kūriniai, išdėstyti dviejuose stulpeliuose: viename 
stulpelyje angliška eilėraščio versija arba angliškas jo aprašymas, o kitame – eilėraštis 
originalo kalba. Knygoje taip pat yra prologas, pratarmė, padėka bei bibliografija. Knyga 
skaitoma remiantis serija nuorodų, padedančių rasti reikiamas knygos vietas. 
 

Be prieš tai minėto galutinio ELBA projekto tikslo bei svarbaus techninių priemonių 
panaudojimo akcento, labai svarbu paminėti kultūrinį bendradarbiavimą dalyvių susitikimų 
metu ir sėkmingą komunikaciją per atstumą, padėjusią suvienyti net kelias Europos šalis. 
Tikimės, kad ELBA sukurta knyga ir toliau sėkmingai atliks tarpkultūrinės jungties vaidmenį. 
Šią misiją galėtų paspartinti knygos įtraukimas į bendrąsias mokymo programas. 

 
Šiuo aspektu ELBA projektas yra puikus tarptautinio dialogo bei bendradarbiavimo 

pavyzdys, kurio išraiška tapo elektroninė knyga suaugusiems -  naujos, technologinės eros 
vaisius. 
 
 
 
Pilar Cataño Canabal 
ELBA Projekto Koordinatorius 

 

 [Index] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            642      

 

  

 

Prólogo [English]  
 

Estamos inmersos en un mundo en el que se están efectuando profundos cambios que 
afectan al modo de comunicarnos y a la manera de producir. Modos y maneras que, por otra 
parte, están imbricadas entre sí muy estrechamente para generar lo que empieza a llamarse 
Sociedad del Conocimiento. En efecto, en la sociedad actual la característica emergente es el 
conocimiento, conocimiento que resulta de la comunicación entre los hombres y de éstos con 
la naturaleza a través de sus actividades de producción de los bienes que le son necesarios 
para su mantenimiento y para su desarrollo humano. La acumulación y transmisión de este 
conocimiento se ha realizado a lo largo de la historia a través de los libros y las bibliotecas y 
de los sistemas educativos. En el momento actual estos elementos −bibliotecas y escuelas− 
están sufriendo una profunda transformación que se refleja, por una parte, en la nueva forma 
de editar y en la estructura y organización de los nuevos tipos de bibliotecas y, por otra, en la 
necesidad de que evolucionen los métodos de enseñanza y de pedagogía cada vez mas 
orientados a una formación permanente. 
 

Además, los requerimientos de trabajo que se de demandaran en la naciente Sociedad 
del Conocimiento implican una cantidad cada vez mayor de información y de conocimientos 
altamente dinámicos que evolucionarán rápidamente en el tiempo. La creación de este 
conocimiento será la principal aportación del hombre el los procesos productivos a los que se 
incorporará mediante artefactos automáticos cada vez más sofisticados. 
 

Dentro de este marco general, hemos querido contribuir con el presente proyecto a 
encontrar nuevas maneras de trabajar y de organizar el trabajo (coordinada y distribuida), y a 
estudiar de forma práctica las nuevas tecnologías aplicadas a la edición mediante la 
capacitación técnica que las nuevas tareas requieren. Organizando nuestro trabajo, conscientes 
de que también colaboramos a la integración cultural de los países que participan en el 
proyecto (y con ello de Europa) mediante un producto cuyo contenido recoge de forma 
histórica una de las actividades más sensibles de la cultura: la poesía. Para ello nos 
propusimos elaborar una Antología de Poesía social de los siglos XIX y primera parte del XX 
de los países que cooperaron en el desarrollo del proyecto. 
 

Iniciamos nuestra tarea elaborando los contenidos y estructura del libro electrónico 
propuesto. Esto nos llevó, como tarea previa, al estudio de la literatura, cultura e historia de 
ese período. Determinamos que la antología contuviese algún poema de medio centenar de 
poetas selectos de cada país participante. Estudiamos los repertorios, los contextos culturales 
e históricos, las similitudes de situación en cada país, y reflexionamos que para la integración 
de Europa, debíamos convertir los antagonismos interiores en cooperación efectiva que se 
inicia con el conocimiento mutuo en la búsqueda de lo común europeo que permita acercar las 
culturas. El resultado de este trabajo se materializó en una colección de más de 250 poemas, 
pertenecientes a escritores de cinco países y escritos en 4 lenguas. Para homogeneizar el 
producto tomamos la lengua inglesa como lengua de comunicación común, y mantuvimos las 
lenguas propias para expresar la diversidad dentro de la unidad. Para ello hubo que realizar o 
localizar las traducciones correspondientes, con lo cual se obtuvo un producto multilingüe. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            643      

 

  

 
La realización de este trabajo intelectual previo nos parece que es muy conveniente 

antes de iniciar cualquier trabajo o proceso técnico, ya que es muy formativo y motivador 
estudiar y conocer la finalidad para la cual se hacen nuestras tareas. Sobre todo si están 
orientadas a la emergente Sociedad del Conocimiento en la que lo importante serán los 
contenidos y las técnicas las cuales utilizaremos para facilitar la creación cultural, la difusión 
de ésta, ó su aplicación mediante dispositivos automáticos a los procesos de producción de 
bienes materiales. 
 

Después de realizar estas tareas, enfocamos nuestro trabajo a la definición del 
producto material que teníamos como objetivo: la realización de un libro electrónico. Esto nos 
llevó en primer lugar al estudio de la naturaleza y estructura de este tipo de libros. En segundo 
lugar a aprender con las técnicas de digitalización necesarias, como primer paso,   para pasar 
los contenidos de textos impresos en papel a los nuevos soportes electrónicos. Y experimentar 
cuáles eran los modos más adecuados a emplear en nuestro caso concreto. Estas tareas se 
realizaron de forma distribuida elaborando herramientas de comunicación entre los diferentes 
grupos asociados al proyecto; participaron en su realización los alumnos de las instituciones 
colaboradoras aprendiendo las técnicas de digitalización y la naturaleza y estructura de los 
libros digitales. 
 

Así hemos propuesto un tema a la formación profesional permanente consistente en el 
aprendizaje de una nueva tecnología que, además, tiene un efecto multiplicador importante: la 
edición digital. En efecto, de cara al futuro, la mayor parte de la información circulará en 
forma digital, por eso creemos que la capacitación en estas técnicas será básica para la 
difusión y aprendizaje de otras que se expondrán o explicaran en “textos” digitales, con la 
facilidad de incluir imágenes, audio, y enlaces a videos y otras herramientas interactivos que 
faciliten el entrenamiento. Además, por la propia naturaleza de las técnicas electrónicas, a 
diferencia de las mecánicas utilizadas por Gutenberg, hace que las plataformas de hardware 
necesarias para la edición digital sean mucho más simples de uso, de instalación y de 
mantenimiento y mucho más económicas que los métodos anteriores dedicados a la edición, 
por lo que es más sencillo instalar pequeños talleres, incluso domésticos, para la realización 
de productos de edición digital incluso de gran calidad. Por otra parte, promover la edición 
digital, no sólo de textos nuevos, sino de los textos contenidos en nuestras bibliotecas, y la 
organización de los textos digitales en bibliotecas digitales, facilitará sin duda la lectura y 
pondrá al alcance de todos el acceso a la cultura. 
 

Terminamos nuestro trabajo con la edición física de un libro electrónico, titulado 
“European Collection of Social Poetry and Art (1800 -1950).”.  Las tareas realizadas en esta 
última etapa consistieron básicamente en el diseño de la estructura y en la realización material 
del libro electrónico. La estructura se fijó mediante la división del material en cinco capítulos 
(una para cada país colaborador); cada sección se compone de una introducción a la poesía del 
país, de un índice de autores de ese país, y a cada autor se le dedica una sección encabezada 
por su biografía seguida de los poemas correspondientes expuestos en una doble columna 
(una en la que muestra el poema en inglés y otra en la lengua original); también contiene unas 
secciones dedicadas a prólogo, introducción, agradecimientos, bibliografía…El 
desplazamiento a lo largo del libro se realiza a través de una serie de enlaces (hipervínculos) 
que partiendo de un índice inicial nos conducen a cada una de los capítulos, y de los índices 
de los capítulos a la sección de cada poeta, los enlaces de retorno adecuados para que 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            644      

 

  

desplazarse por el libro se haga con toda facilidad. También se ha experimentado con las 
implicaciones que tiene, incluir un libro digital en la red, o cómo se iniciaría la constitución 
de una biblioteca digital. 
 

Además del producto especifico, objeto del proyecto ELBA, y de la introducción de 
técnicas y prácticas educativas nuevas, queremos también señalar como otro de los objetivos 
que hemos buscado en la realización del proyecto, el empleo, de la organización distribuida y 
coordinada, en el desarrollo de proyectos y la experimentación del trabajo cooperativo 
utilizando redes informáticas distribuidas en ámbitos geográficos amplios. Tema éste que 
también debería incluirse como tema de aprendizaje en las instituciones de capacitación 
profesional para ayudar a la formación de equipos de trabajo situados en distintos países o 
regiones geográficas. 
 

El desarrollo del libro electrónico, objetivo del proyecto Elba, aparte de los aspectos 
técnicos de nuestro trabajo, nos ha ayudado a conocernos los unos a los otros a través de la 
definición de los perfiles culturales de nuestros propios países y nos ha permitido la 
transferencia de conocimiento y la integración dentro de lo amplio de la diversidad cultural de 
los países participantes. Además, como el proceso de evolución de las diferentes culturas 
europeas llevan un paso distinto, las nuevas tecnologías actúan como herramienta que ayudan 
a la nivelación del desarrollo individual y social con el objetivo de la formación de un espíritu 
común europeo. 
 

En este sentido y dentro del nuevo marco de construcción y de diálogo intercultural el 
proyecto Elba es un ejemplo de participación conjunta en la elaboración de un tejido cultural 
materializado en el libro desarrollado, potenciado por la introducción de las nuevas 
tecnologías, y dando paso a una actividad fructífera de cooperación donde la iniciativa y la 
responsabilidad de los participantes se incrementa. 
 
 
 
Pilar Cataño Canabal 
Coordinadora Proyecto Elba 
 

 [Index] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            645      

 

  

[Index] 

Foreword 

 

Προοίμιο [English]  

Για τον συνηθισμένο αναγνώστη, η ακόλουθη συλλογή μπορεί να φανεί τυχαία με την 
πρώτη ματιά, όμως αν εξετάσει καλύτερα αυτά τα ποιήματα κάτω από το πρίσμα της ποίησης 
μπορεί να δει ένα πλήθος αισθητικών και φιλοσοφικών αρχών.  

Κάποιος μπορεί να ελπίζει ότι αυτά μπορούν να γεφυρώσουν το κενό ανάμεσα στην 
ιδιαιτερότητα των εμπειριών και στην συνολικότητα της αντίληψης της ζωής εκφραζόμενη 
από την Ευρωπαϊκή πολιτιστική κληρονομιά.  

Προσπαθώ να θυμηθώ πώς η ποιότητα της σκέψης, όπως ορίζεται στη Δύση σαν 
πνευματικότητα των νέων, έχει παραλειφθεί στην Ευρωπαϊκή κοινωνία. Όταν δεν αγνοείται, 
γελοιοποιούνταν χάριν του κέρδους και λόγω της υλιστικής ιδεολογίας.  

Όμως η ελευθερία της ατομικής έκφρασης αποτελεί μόνο μια από τις πολλές 
διαφορετικές πλευρές της ανθρώπινης δημιουργικότητας. Η ποίηση, όπως έχουμε 
παρατηρήσει, είναι ένα μέσο κατάλληλο για την διατήρηση της ισορροπίας ανάμεσα στις δύο 
πραγματικότητες που αντιμετωπίζει η Ευρώπη συνεχώς. Η μια αποτελεί την εσωτερική 
πραγματικότητα του μυαλού, και η άλλη την πραγματικότητα της αυτοσυντήρησης του 
κόσμου όπως αυτός είναι.  

Θαυμάζουμε την ισορροπία και την πνευματική πειθαρχία που συντελούνταν στον 
κλασικισμό. Εμφανίζεται εμπνευσμένο από το κλασικό μοντέλο της τελειότητας όπως 
εφαρμόστηκε στη σύγχρονη ποίηση παρόλο που οι κανόνες που διέπουν μερικά από τα έργα 
προέρχονται από την ιδέα της κλασικιστικής απομίμησης οπουδήποτε συμπεριλαμβανομένων 
και των παλαιότερων δημιουργών.    

Το περιεχόμενο και η δομή είναι αδιαχώριστα συνυφασμένα.  Ένα ποίημα μπορεί να 
δημιουργήσει διάθεση, εικόνα ή συναίσθημα. Η ποίηση συνήθως μορφοποιεί λέξεις ή 
μηνύματα. Ένα ποίημα μπορεί να πει ιστορίες παρόμοιες με ένα παραμύθι ή θρύλος. Ένα 
ποίημα γραμμένο σε οποιαδήποτε μορφή συχνά μοιάζει με το ρυθμό της ομιλίας. Ένα ποίημα 
μπορεί να είναι γραμμένο σχετικά με τη ζωή κάποιου, τα γνωρίσματα μια προσωπικότητας 
και τις φιλοδοξίες. Η ποίηση αντιμετωπίζει πολλές φορές ένα σοβαρό θέμα με χιούμορ. Τα 
θέματα συνήθως συνδέονται με την αγάπη και τον ρομαντισμό.  

Η ποίηση που τηρεί τις αρχές και τα ιδανικά της ομορφιάς που είναι χαρακτηριστικά 
της ελληνικής και ρωμαϊκής τέχνης, αρχιτεκτονικής και λογοτεχνίας.   

Ένα ποίημα μιλάει σε έναν ακροατή. Ένα ποίημα μπορεί να είναι γραμμένο στη 
μνήμη ανθρώπων όλων των εθνών και των πολιτισμών. Ένα σύντομο λυρικό ποίημα μπορεί 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            646      

 

  

να περιέχει ποιητικές σκέψεις. Οι σκέψεις και τα θέματα είναι συνήθως συνδεδεμένα με την 
αγάπη και τον ρομαντισμό. Η κατακλείδα συχνά περιλαμβάνει το μήνυμα της ζωής του 
ποιητή όπως ο ίδιος ο ποιητής την αντιλαμβάνεται.  

Η ποίηση, μια ειρηνική και ιδεατή σκηνή, λέει ιστορίες σχετικά με ήρωες της παλιάς 
εποχής. Η ποίηση απεικονίζει την αγροτική ζωή με έναν ειρηνικό ρομαντικό τρόπο.  

 [Index] 

 

Prefazione [English]

Per il lettore casuale, le seguenti selezioni letterarie potrebbero sembrare, ad un primo 
sguardo, casuali; tuttavia, esaminando più approfonditamente queste opere si può intravedere, 
attraverso il prisma della poesia, dei principi estetici e filosofici. 

Il lettore può anche sperare che ciò possa colmare la lacuna tra ciò che di particolare 
c’è nella sua esperienza e ciò  che di universale c’è nella prospettiva della vita, espressa nella 
cultura e nei mondi Europei. 

Cerco di ricordare come le qualità della mente, considerate nel mondo occidentale 
come aspetto di elezione dei giovani, sono stati trascurati nella società Europea. Quando non  
ignorati, tali aspetti sono stati ridicolizzati in nome del profitto e sulla base di un’ideologia 
materialistica. 

Tuttavia, la libertà di espressione individuale, costituisce uno dei molti aspetti della 
creatività umana. La Poesia, come abbiamo  osservato, è il  mezzo più adeguato per 
mantenere l’equilibrio tra le due realtà che l’Europa si trova costantemente ad affrontare; la 
prima, che è la realtà più interiore della mente e l’altra  che è la realtà dell’auto- 
conservazione del mondo. 

Ammiriamo l’equilibrio e  la moderazione intellettuale attribuiti al Classicismo. Esso 
appare ispirato dal modello classico di eccellenza  applicato alla poesia contemporanea, anche 
se le regole che governano alcune  delle opere sono assolutamente lontane dalla nozione di 
imitazione classicistica dei poeti, compresi i vecchi artisti. 

Il contenuto e la forma sono inseparabilmente intrecciati. Un poema può creare un 
clima, un’immagine o un sentimento.  La poesia di solito compone parole o messaggi. Un 
poema può raccontare storie simili a favole popolari o leggende. Un poema, qualunque sia lo 
stile con il quale è stato scritto, è spesso simile al ritmo del linguaggio. Un poema è spesso 
autobiografico, descrive tratti di personalità e ambizioni. La poesia tratta temi seri talvolta con 
umorismo. I temi sono spesso collegati all’amore e alle relazioni amorose.  

La poesia che contiene i principi e gli ideali di bellezza che sono caratteristiche 
dell’arte, dell’architettura e della letteratura greche e romane. 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            647      

 

  

Un poema parla a chi lo ascolta. Un poema scritto in onore del popolo e e di tutte le 
nazioni e le culture. Un breve componimento lirico può contenere il pensiero poetico. I temi 
sono spesso collegati all’amore e alle relazioni amorose. L’impronta finale spesso contiene il 
senso della vita come è percepito dal poeta. 

La Poesia, idealizzato scenario di pace , ci racconta storie di eroi del tempo passato.  
La Poesia descrive la vita contadina in un modo romantico e pieno di pace. 

[Index] 

 

 

 

Pratarmė [English]

Iš pirmo žvilgsnio ši pratarmė skaitytojui gali pasirodyti lėkšta, tačiau perskaitęs šiuos 
eilėraščius, jis turėtų įžvelgti estetinių bei filosofinių vertybių. Galima tikėtis, kad tai priartins 
patirtį prie universalaus požiūrio į europinės kultūros gyvenimą. 

Dažnai tikrosios Europos vertybės yra pamirštamos, jas keičia materialinės, 
svarbiausiu dalyku tampa turtas ir pinigai. Laimei, saviraiškos laisvė vis dar skatina žmogų 
kurti. Poezija tarsi tiltas, jungiantis du krantus, išlaiko pusiausvyrą tarp dviejų realijų, su 
kuriomis Europa susiduria - proto ir poreikio išsaugoti kultūrinį paveldą. 

Mes žavimės Europos klasicizmo literatūros santūrumu, kurį nulėmė griežti kanonai 
iki šiol darantys įtaką šiuolaikinei poezijai. 

Turinys ir forma yra neatsiejami. Eilėraštis kuria nuotaiką, jausmą, vaizdinį. Poezija 
dažnai atspindi senąsias pasakas ir legendas, ji prabyla į žmogų tarsi gyva būtybė. Atskleidžia 
žmonių gyvenimus, jų vertybes bei ambicijas, rimtas problemas sprendžia su šypsena. Juk 
dažniausia eilėraščių tematika esti meilė. 
 

Betgi yra ir poezijos, kalbančios apie idealus, artimus graikų bei romėnų kultūrai, jų 
menui.  
 

Eilėraštis kalba su skaitytoju. Eilėraštis kreipiasi į visų tautų bei kultūrų žmones, 
dažnai atskleisdamas kūrėjo išgyvenimus, senąsias vertybes bei pasaulio suvokimą. 

 
[Index] 

 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            648      

 

  

 

Prefacio [English]
 

Para un lector desatento podría parecer, a primera vista, que la selección de poemas 
aquí recogidos se hubiese hecho al azar, pero si examinase de cerca  estos poemas con el 
prisma de la poesía se daría cuenta que hemos utilizado un gran número de principios 
estéticos y filosóficos. 

 
Además, esperamos que esta selección sirva de puente para unir la diferencia que 

separa la experiencia particular de cada país y la perspectiva universal expresadas por la 
cultura y los mundos europeos. 
 

Se trata de recuperar las cualidades de la mente, consideradas en Occidente como el 
espíritu de la juventud, que han sido relegadas en la sociedad europea, cuando no ignoradas o 
despreciadas, en nombre del beneficio,  sobre la base de una ideología materialista. 
 

Sin embargo, la libertad de expresión individual constituye solo uno de los muchos y 
diferentes aspectos de la creatividad humana. La Poesía −tal como la hemos considerado− es 
el medio más adecuado para mantener el equilibrio entre las dos realidades con las que se 
enfrenta constantemente Europa: una, la realidad interna de la mente, y la otra, la realidad de 
la auto conservación en el mundo tal como es. 
 

El contenido y la forma se entretejen indefinidamente. Un poema puede crear un 
estado de ánimo, una imagen ó un sentimiento. La poesía forma regularmente palabras y 
mensajes. Un poema puede contar historias en forma de cuentos populares ó leyendas. Un 
poema escrito en cualquier estilo recuerda, a menudo, los ritmos del lenguaje, por ejemplo, un 
poema escrito sobre la propia vida, sobre la personalidad, los rasgos y las ambiciones. La 
poesía trata, a veces, temas serios con humor, o temas relacionados con el amor y el romance. 
La poesía mantiene los principios e ideales de la belleza característicos del arte, la 
arquitectura y la literatura greco-romana. 
 

Un poema le habla al oyente, un poema escrito en honor de la gente de todas las 
naciones y culturas. Un breve poema lírico puede contener profundos pensamientos poéticos. 
Los pensamientos y los temas en la poesía están frecuentemente relacionados con el amor y el 
romance. El contenido final del poema incluye, a menudo, el significado de la vida tal como 
ha sido percibida por el propio poeta. 
 

La poesía, en una escena pacífica e idealizada, cuenta historias sobre héroes de otro 
tiempo. La poesía representa la vida rural de una manera pacífica y romántica. 

  

[Index] 

 



 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            649      

 

  

[Index] 

Acknowledgements 

 

Ευχαριστίες [English]  
 

Θα ήταν λάθος να πούμε ότι μια εργασία τέτοιου μεγέθους είναι παράγωγο ενός ή δύο 
ατόμων, ειδικά όταν μέσω του περιεχομένου καλύπτεται η Ευρωπαϊκή επικράτεια. Είμαστε 
ιδιαίτερα ευγνώμονες προς τους ευρωπαίους συναδέλφους μας  που επέλεξαν και συνέλεξαν 
τις πληροφορίες για το ηλεκτρονικό βιβλίο και διαχειρίστηκαν την ηλεκτρονική δημοσίευση 
του μετά από τρία χρόνια συνεργασίας στον τομέα αυτό. 
 

Θα θέλαμε ιδιαιτέρως να ευχαριστήσουμε την κυρία Mrs. Pilar Cataño από τον 
οργανισμό Aldesoc που είχε τον συντονισμό του προγράμματος. Επίσης θα θέλαμε να 
ευχαριστήσουμε όλους όσους διέθεσαν το χρόνο και τις γνώσεις τους ελεύθερα και με 
ενθουσιασμό για το πρόγραμμα: κα. Carolina Garcia, καθ. Roberto Garcia Tomé, κα. Maria 
Teresa Pérez Bouza, κα. Zulima González García από τον οργανισμό  Aldesoc - Ισπανία, κα. 
Anna Maria Rossi, κα. Paola Novellini, κα. Lucilla Crosta, κ. Leandro Morelli, κ. Alberto 
Rigoldi από τον οργανισμό Kelidon - Ιταλία, κα. Norma Patelli, κα. Elena Paltrinieri, κα. 
Sandra Anceschi,  από τον οργανισμό Carpiformazione - Ιταλία, κα. Inga Jagelaviciute, κα. 
Indre Adomaitiene, κα. Kristina Martinaviciute, κ. Gintaras Jurkevicius από τον οργανισμό 
Vilnius Gabriele Petkevicaite – Bite AEC - Λιθουανία, κ. Sofoklis Charalambides, κ. 
Stelios Georgiou, κα. Antonia Loizou, κα. Margarita Charalambidou, κα. Eleni Georgiou, κα. 
Adriana Georgiou,  κ. Michalis Ioannou από τον οργανισμό Adult Educational Centres - 
Κύπρος, κ. Vassilis Sakkas κ. Xenofon Strimpis, κα. Eleni Kaltsa, κ. Christos Ntalianis, κα. 
Sofia Katopodi, κα. Vassiliki Tavla, κ. Manolis Kessoglou, κ. Ioannis Papalambros, κ. 
Thanassis Theodosiou, κ. Panagiotis Karampogias από την Ένωση Επιστημόνων 
Πληροφορικής και Τηλεπικοινωνιών Βοιωτίας - Ελλάδα. 

 
Ιδιαίτερη μνεία πρέπει να γίνει για τους συνεργάτες μας από το Πανεπιστήμιο Dokuz 

Eylul - Τουρκία: κ. Bulent Cavas, κ. Ali Balim Gunay, κ. Teoman Kesercioglu, κ. Metin 
Bulus, κα.Duygu Seyman για την εξαίρετη συνεργασία τους στη ομάδα εργασίας του έργου 
ELBA. Δείγμα της συνεισφερόμενης δουλειάς τους μπορεί να βρεθεί στην ηλεκτρονική 
διεύθυνση http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip .  

 
Ιδιαίτερες ευχαριστίες επίσης θα θέλαμε να απευθύνουμε στις οικογένειές μας που 

μας στήριξαν και μας ενθάρρυναν τα τελευταία τρία χρόνια.  
 

Τέλος, ευχαριστούμε την Ευρωπαϊκή Επιτροπή για την οικονομική τους ενίσχυση που 
μας έδωσε τη δυνατότητα να υλοποιήσουμε το πρόγραμμα.  

 

 [Index] 

http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            650      

 

  

 

Ringraziamenti [English]  
 

Sarebbe un errore pensare che un prodotto  come questo sia solo il risultato  del lavoro 
di un paio di persone, specialmente quando il contenuto copre il continente Europeo. Siamo 
particolarmente grati alle persone che, in diversi angoli dell’Europa, hanno  raccolto e 
selezionato le informazioni per il presente libro elettronico  ed hanno collaborato per la 
pubblicazione elettronica durante gli ultimi tre anni.  

 
Vorremmo in particolare ringraziare Pilar Cataño di  Aldesoc, coordinatrice del 

progetto. Desideriamo anche ringraziare tutti coloro che hanno dedicato, in modo libero ed 
entusiasta,  il loro tempo e la loro esperienza al progetto: Carolina Garcia, Roberto Garcia 
Tomé,  Maria Teresa Pérez Bouza, Zulima González García di  Aldesoc- SPAGNA; Anna 
Maria Rossi, Paola Novellini, Lucilla Crosta, Leandro Morelli, Alberto Rigoldi di Kelidon- 
ITALIA; Norma Patelli, Elena Paltrinieri, Sandra Anceschi di  Carpiformazione- ITALIA; 
Inga Jagelaviciute, Indre Adomaitiene, Kristina Martinaviciute, Gintaras Jurkevicius del  
Vilnius Gabriele Petkevicaite Bite AEC- LITUANIA; Sofoklis Charalambides, Stelios 
Georgiou, Antonia Loizou, Margarita Charalambidou, Eleni Georgiou, Adriana Georgiou,   
Michalis Ioannou dell’ Adult Educational Centres -CIPRO; Vassilis Sakkas, Xenofon 
Strimpis, Eleni Kaltsa, Christos Ntalianis,  Sofia Katopodi, Vassiliki Tavla, Manolis 
Kessoglou, Ioannis Papalambros, Thanassis Theodosiou, Panagiotis Karampogias dell’ 
Unione degli Esperti IT di Viotia  GRECIA. 
 

Una speciale menzione va riservata ai nostri partners associati dell’Università Dokuz 
Elyul, Bulent Cavas ,  Ali Balim Gunay, Teoman Kesercioglu,. Metin Bulus e Duygu Seyman 
per la loro eccellente collaborazione all’interno del partenariato e il loro lavoro 
esemplificativo, reperibile all’indirizzo web http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip

 

Grazie inoltre a tutte le nostre famiglie che ci hanno supportato ed incoraggiato 
durante tutta la durata del progetto. 

 

Grazie infine  alla Commissione Europea per il supporto finanziario che ha consentito 
la realizzazione del progetto. 

 
[Index] 

 

 

http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            651      

 

  

 

Padėka [English]  
 

Turbūt būtų sunku apsimesti, kad ši knyga yra vieno ar dviejų asmenų darbo vaisius, 
ypač pamačius, jog turinys apima visą Europą. Ypatingai esami dėkingi žmonėms iš įvairių 
Europos valstybių, kurie surinko medžiagą ir po trijų metų bendro darbo parengė elektroninę 
knygą. 
 

Ypatingai norėtume padėkoti projekto koordinatorei Pilar Cataño iš Aldesoc 
(Madridas, Ispanija). Taip pat esame dėkingi visiems, kurie kupini entuziazmo ir 
geranoriškumo, skyrė didelę dalį savo laiko ir patirties bei aktyviai dalyvavo projekto 
veikloje. Tai Carolina Garcia, profesorius Roberto Garcia Tomé, Maria Teresa Pérez Bouza, 
Zulima González García iš Aldesoc (Madridas, Ispanija), Anna Maria Rossi, Paola Novellini, 
Lucilla Crosta, Leandro Morelli, Alberto Rigoldi iš Kelidon (Legnano, Italija), Norma 
Patelli, Elena Paltrinieri, Sandra Anceschi, iš Carpiformazione (Karpi, Italija), Inga 
Jagelavičiūtė, Indrė Adomaitienė, Kristina Martinavičiūtė, Gintaras Jurkevičius iš Vilniaus 
Gabrielės Petkevičaitės – Bitės suaugusiųjų mokymo centro (Vilnius, Lietuva), Sofoklis 
Charalambides, Stelios Georgiou, Antonia Loizou, Margarita Charalambidou, Eleni 
Georgiou, Adriana Georgiou, Michalis Ioannou iš Suaugusiųjų mokymo centro (Larnaka, 
Kipras), Vassilis Sakkas, Xenofon Strimpis, Eleni Kaltsa, Christos Ntalianis, Sofia Katopodi, 
Vassiliki Tavla, Manolis Kessoglou, Ioannis Papalambros, Thanassis Theodosiou, Panagiotis 
Karampogias iš Informacinių technologijų mokslo sąjungos (Livadija, Graikija). 
 

Negalime nepaminėti projekto partnerių iš Dokuz Eylul universiteto (Izmir, Turkija). 
Už puikų bendradarbiavimą dėkojame Bulent Cavas, Ali Balim Gunay, Teoman Kesercioglu, 
Metin Bulus ir Duygu Seyman. Jų atliktą darbą galima rasti pagal šią nuorodą 
http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip . 
 

Turėtume būti dėkingi mūsų šeimoms ir artimiesiems, palaikiusiems ir drąsinusiems 
mus pastaruosius tris metus. 
 

Žinoma, ypatinga padėka skiriama Europos Komisijai už finansinę paramą ir galimybę 
įgyvendinti šį projektą. 

 
[Index] 

 

 

 

http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip


 
EELLBBAA    ––  EElleeccttrroonniicc  BBooookk  ffoorr  AAdduullttss                                                                                                                                            652      

 

  

 

Agradecimientos [English]  
 
Seria un error pretender que un trabajo, como el que aquí presentamos, es el producto 

de una ó dos personas, máxime cuando el contenido abarca al continente europeo. Estamos 
agradecidos especialmente a las personas en Europa que han coleccionado y seleccionado el 
material para este libro electrónico que ha culminado en su publicación electrónica al término 
de tres años de trabajo cooperativo. 
 

Nos gustaría agradecer especialmente a la Sra. Pilar Cataño quien fue la coordinadora 
de este proyecto. También queremos agradecer a todos aquellos que contribuyeron con su 
tiempo y su experiencia, de forma gratuita y entusiasta en la realización de este proyecto: Srta. 
Carolina García , Profesor Roberto García Tomé, Sra. María Teresa Pérez Bouza y Sra. 
Zulima González, García de Aldesoc; Sra. Anna Maria Rossi, Srta. Poala Novellini, Sra. 
Lucilla Crosta, Sr Leandro Morelli, Sr. Alberto Rigoldi de Kelidon; Sra. Norma Patelli, Sra. 
Elena Paltrinieri, Sra. Sandra Anceshi de Carpiformazione; Sta. Inga Jagelaviciute, Sta. 
Indre Adomaitiene, Sta. Kristina Martinaviciute, Sr. Gintaras Jurkevicius de Vilnius 
Gabrielle  Petkevicaite   -Bite-AEC; Sr. Sofoklis Charalambides, Sr. Stelios Georgiou, Sra. 
Antonia Loizou, Margarita Charalambidou, Sra. Eleni Georgiou, Sta. Adriana Georgiou,  Sr. 
Michalis Ioannou de Adult Educational Centres; . Sr. Vassilis Sakkas, Sr. Xenofon 
Strimpis, Sta. Eleni Kaltsa, Sr. Christos Ntalianis, Sta. Sofia Katopodi, Sr. Vassiliki Tavla, Sr. 
Manolis Kessoglou, Sr. Ioannis Papalambros, Sr. Thanassis Theodosiou, Sr. Panagiotis 
Karampogias de Union of IT Scientists of Viotia. 

 
Merecen una especial mención  nuestros socios de la Universidad de Eylul Dokuz de 

Turquía: los señores Don Bulent Cavas, Don Ali Balim Gunay, Don Teoman Kesercioglu, 
Don Metin Bulus, y la Srta. Dña. Duygu Seyman por su excelente trabajo en la Asociación. 
Pueden encontrar una muestra de su colaboración en http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip

 
Igualmente, un agradecimiento especial a nuestras familias que nos ayudaron y 

animaron durante los tres últimos años. 

Y por último, agradecer a la Comisión Europea  su apoyo financiero el cual nos 
permitió el desarrollo del proyecto y la realización del libro electrónico. 

 

 [Index] 

 
 

 

http://elbaproject.net/ELBA.zip

	“ Que es mi barco mi tesoro, 

